

14. J Gen Virol. 2017 Jan;98(1):96-107. doi: 10.1099/jgv.0.000699. Epub 2017 Feb 22.

Comparative analysis of 22 Epstein-Barr virus genomes from diseased and healthy
individuals.

Zhou L(1), Chen JN(1), Qiu XM(2), Pan YH(1), Zhang ZG(1), Shao CK(1).

Author information: 
(1)1​Department of Pathology, The Third Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, No. 600 Tianhe Road, Guangzhou 510630, PR China.
(2)2​DRIGEN Co. Ltd, No. 121-122 Chuangye Yuan, Shenzhen 518100, PR China.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infects most of the world's population and is causally
associated with several human cancers, but little is known about how EBV genetic 
variations might influence EBV-associated diseases and their geographical
patterns. In the present study, 22 EBV whole-genome sequences from diseased and
healthy individuals were analysed to explore EBV sequence variations at the
whole-genome level. We found that the 22 EBV genomes were generally highly
similar to each other at the genome level. However, varying degrees of genetic
diversity were detected across the entire genome, especially in the latent genes.
In contrast, the sequences of promoters and non-coding RNAs were strictly
conserved. These findings suggested that both latent genes and non-coding RNAs
play important roles in the EBV life cycle. When we investigated changes in known
T-cell epitopes in some latent and lytic proteins, we observed that some T-cell
epitopes were changed, while others were conserved. These findings indicate that 
the effect of EBV variations in protein sequences that seem to have been selected
by the host immune system should be considered when conducting EBV-targeted
immunotherapy. Taken together, our results provide a global view of EBV genome
sequence variation, which not only is important for designing vaccines and
immunotherapy for EBV but also adds to the understanding of EBV biology and the
relationships between viral sequence variation and EBV-associated diseases.

DOI: 10.1099/jgv.0.000699 
PMID: 28036243  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
