

19. J Med Microbiol. 2016 Nov;65(11):1243-1252. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.000352. Epub 2016 
Sep 12.

Analysis of Epstein-Barr virus and cellular gene expression during the early
phases of Epstein-Barr virus lytic induction.

Auburn H(1), Zuckerman M(1), Smith M(1).

Author information: 
(1)1â€‹Department of Virology, South London Specialist Virology Centre, King's
College NHS Foundation Trust, Denmark Hill, London SE5 9RS, UK.

In order to develop novel host/pathogen real-time PCR assays for routine
diagnostic use, early gene expression patterns from both Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
and Raji cells were examined after inducing the lytic life cycle using
12-O-tetradecanoyl-13-phorbol ester and sodium butyrate. Real-time PCR identified
several highly induced (>90-fold) EBV lytic genes over a 48 h time course during 
the lytic induction phase. Latent genes were induced at low levels during this
phase. The cellular response to lytic viral replication is poorly understood.
Whole human genome microarray analysis identified 113 cellular genes regulated
twofold or more by EBV, including 63 upregulated and 46 downregulated genes, over
a 24 h time course post-induction. The most upregulated gene was CHI3L1, a
chitinase-3-like 1 protein (18.1-fold; P<0.0084), and the most downregulated gene
was TYMS, a thymidylate synthetase (-7.6-fold). Gene Ontology enrichment analysis
using MetaCore software revealed cell cycle (core), cell cycle (role of
anaphase-promoting complex) in cell cycle regulation) and lymphatic diseases as
the most significantly represented biological network processes, canonical
pathways and disease biomarkers, respectively. Chemotaxis, DNA damage and
inflammation (IL-4 signalling) together with lymphoproliferative disorders and
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma were significantly represented biological processes and
disease biomarkers.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.000352 
PMID: 27625030  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
