

26. J Prev Med Public Health. 2016 Mar;49(2):97-107. doi: 10.3961/jpmph.15.068. Epub 
2016 Mar 4.

Epstein-Barr Virus and Gastric Cancer Risk: A Meta-analysis With Meta-regression 
of Case-control Studies.

Bae JM(1), Kim EH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Jeju National University School of
Medicine, Jeju, Korea.

OBJECTIVES: Research on how the risk of gastric cancer increases with
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection is lacking. In a systematic review that
investigated studies published until September 2014, the authors did not
calculate the summary odds ratio (SOR) due to heterogeneity across studies.
Therefore, we include here additional studies published until October 2015 and
conduct a meta-analysis with meta-regression that controls for the heterogeneity 
among studies.
METHODS: Using the studies selected in the previously published systematic
review, we formulated lists of references, cited articles, and related articles
provided by PubMed. From the lists, only case-control studies that detected EBV
in tissue samples were selected. In order to control for the heterogeneity among 
studies, subgroup analysis and meta-regression were performed.
RESULTS: In the 33 case-control results with adjacent non-cancer tissue, the
total number of test samples in the case and control groups was 5280 and 4962,
respectively. In the 14 case-control results with normal tissue, the total number
of test samples in case and control groups was 1393 and 945, respectively. Upon
meta-regression, the type of control tissue was found to be a statistically
significant variable with regard to heterogeneity. When the control tissue was
normal tissue of healthy individuals, the SOR was 3.41 (95% CI, 1.78 to 6.51;
I-squared, 65.5%).
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the present study support the argument that EBV
infection increases the risk of gastric cancer. In the future, age-matched and
sex-matched case-control studies should be conducted.

DOI: 10.3961/jpmph.15.068 
PMCID: PMC4829373
PMID: 27055546  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
