

28. Virology. 2016 Feb;489:223-32. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2015.12.019. Epub 2016 Jan
13.

Epstein-Barr virus glycoprotein gM can interact with the cellular protein p32 and
knockdown of p32 impairs virus.

Changotra H(1), Turk SM(1), Artigues A(2), Thakur N(1), Gore M(1), Muggeridge
MI(1), Hutt-Fletcher LM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Center for Molecular and Tumor
Virology and Feist-Weiller Cancer Center, Louisiana State University Health
Sciences Center, Shreveport, LA, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, 
KS, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Center for Molecular and Tumor
Virology and Feist-Weiller Cancer Center, Louisiana State University Health
Sciences Center, Shreveport, LA, USA. Electronic address: lhuttf@lsuhsc.edu.

The Epstein-Barr virus glycoprotein complex gMgN has been implicated in assembly 
and release of fully enveloped virus, although the precise role that it plays has
not been elucidated. We report here that the long predicted cytoplasmic tail of
gM is not required for complex formation and that it interacts with the cellular 
protein p32, which has been reported to be involved in nuclear egress of human
cytomegalovirus and herpes simplex virus. Although redistribution of p32 and
colocalization with gM was not observed in virus infected cells, knockdown of p32
expression by siRNA or lentivirus-delivered shRNA recapitulated the phenotype of 
a virus lacking expression of gNgM. A proportion of virus released from cells
sedimented with characteristics of virus lacking an intact envelope and there was
an increase in virus trapped in nuclear condensed chromatin. The observations
suggest the possibility that p32 may also be involved in nuclear egress of
Epstein-Barr virus.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2015.12.019 
PMCID: PMC4761307
PMID: 26773383  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
