

30. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2015;391:289-323. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-22834-1_10.

Epstein-Barr Virus-Specific Humoral Immune Responses in Health and Disease.

Middeldorp JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)VU Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. j.middeldorp@vumc.nl.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is widely distributed in the world and associated with a
still increasing number of acute, chronic, malignant and autoimmune disease
syndromes. Humoral immune responses to EBV have been studied for diagnostic,
pathogenic and protective (vaccine) purposes. These studies use a range of
methodologies, from cell-based immunofluorescence testing to antibody-diversity
analysis using immunoblot and epitope analysis using recombinant or synthetic
peptide-scanning. First, the individual EBV antigen complexes (VCA , MA, EA(D),
EA(R) and EBNA) are defined at cellular and molecular levels, providing a
historic overview. The characteristic antibody responses to these complexes in
health and disease are described, and differences are highlighted by clinical
examples. Options for EBV vaccination are briefly addressed. For a selected
number of immunodominant proteins, in particular EBNA1, the interaction with
human antibodies is further detailed at the epitope level, revealing interesting 
insights for structure, function and immunological aspects, not considered
previously. Humoral immune responses against EBV-encoded tumour antigens LMP1,
LMP2 and BARF1 are addressed, which provide novel options for targeted
immunotherapy. Finally, some considerations on EBV-linked autoimmune diseases are
given, and mechanisms of antigen mimicry are briefly discussed. Further analysis 
of humoral immune responses against EBV in health and disease in carefully
selected patient cohorts will open new options for understanding pathogenesis of 
individual EBV-linked diseases and developing targeted diagnostic and therapeutic
approaches.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-22834-1_10 
PMID: 26428379  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
