

33. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2015;390(Pt 1):119-48. doi:
10.1007/978-3-319-22822-8_7.

Epstein-Barr Virus: From the Detection of Sequence Polymorphisms to the
Recognition of Viral Types.

Feederle R(1)(2), Klinke O(1), Kutikhin A(1), Poirey R(1), Tsai MH(1), Delecluse 
HJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Unit F100, Inserm unit U1074, DKFZ, German Cancer Research Centre (DKFZ),
69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Helmholtz Zentrum MÃ¼nchen, German Research Center for Environmental Health,
Institute of Molecular Immunology, Marchioninistrasse 25, 81377, Munich, Germany.
(3)Unit F100, Inserm unit U1074, DKFZ, German Cancer Research Centre (DKFZ),
69120, Heidelberg, Germany. h.delecluse@dkfz.de.

The Epstein-Barr virus is etiologically linked with the development of benign and
malignant diseases, characterized by their diversity and a heterogeneous
geographic distribution across the world. The virus possesses a 170-kb-large
genome that encodes for multiple proteins and non-coding RNAs. Early on there
have been numerous attempts to link particular diseases with particular EBV
strains, or at least with viral genetic polymorphisms. This has given rise to a
wealth of information whose value has been difficult to evaluate for at least
four reasons. First, most studies have looked only at one particular gene and
missed the global picture. Second, they usually have not studied sufficient
numbers of diseased and control cases to reach robust statistical significance.
Third, the functional significance of most polymorphisms has remained unclear,
although there are exceptions such as the 30-bp deletion in LMP1. Fourth,
different biological properties of the virus do not necessarily equate with a
different pathogenicity. This was best illustrated by the type 1 and type 2
viruses that markedly differ in terms of their transformation abilities, yet do
not seem to cause different diseases. Reciprocally, environmental and genetic
factors in the host are likely to influence the outcome of infections with the
same virus type. However, with recent developments in recombinant virus
technology and in the availability of high throughput sequencing, the tide is now
turning. The availability of 23 complete or nearly complete genomes has led to
the recognition of viral subtypes, some of which possess nearly identical
genotypes. Furthermore, there is growing evidence that some genetic polymorphisms
among EBV strains markedly influence the biological and clinical behavior of the 
virus. Some virus strains are endowed with biological properties that explain
crucial clinical features of patients with EBV-associated diseases. Although we
now have a better overview of the genetic diversity within EBV genomes, it has
also become clear that defining phenotypic traits evinced by cells infected by
different viruses usually result from the combination of multiple polymorphisms
that will be difficult to identify in their entirety. However, the steadily
increasing number of sequenced EBV genomes and cloned EBV BACS from diseased and 
healthy patients will facilitate the identification of the key polymorphisms that
condition the biological and clinical behavior of the viruses. This will allow
the development of preventative and therapeutic approaches against highly
pathogenic viral strains.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-22822-8_7 
PMID: 26424646  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
