

34. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2015;390(Pt 1):103-17. doi:
10.1007/978-3-319-22822-8_6.

The Epigenetic Life Cycle of Epstein-Barr Virus.

Hammerschmidt W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit Gene Vectors, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center 
for Environmental Health, and German Centre for Infection Research (DZIF),
Partner site Munich, Marchioninistr. 25, 81377, Munich, Germany.
hammerschmidt@helmholtz-muenchen.de.

Ever since the discovery of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) more than 50 years ago, this
virus has been studied for its capacity to readily establish a latent infection, 
which is the prominent hallmark of this member of the herpesvirus family. EBV has
become an important model for many aspects of herpesviral latency, but the
molecular steps and mechanisms that lead to and promote viral latency have only
emerged recently. It now appears that the virus exploits diverse facets of
epigenetic gene regulation in the cellular host to establish a latent infection. 
Most viral genes are transcriptionally repressed, and viral chromatin is densely 
compacted during EBV's latent phase, but latent infection is not a dead end. In
order to escape from this phase, epigenetic silencing must be reverted
efficiently and quickly. It appears that EBV has perfected a clever strategy to
overcome transcriptional repression of its many lytic genes to initiate virus de 
novo synthesis within a few hours after induction of its lytic cycle. This review
tries to summarize the known molecular mechanisms, the current models, concepts, 
and ideas underlying this viral strategy. This review also attempts to identify
and address gaps in our current understanding of EBV's epigenetic mechanisms
within the infected cellular host.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-22822-8_6 
PMID: 26424645  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
