

43. J Pathol. 2015 Jan;235(2):323-33. doi: 10.1002/path.4448.

The role of Epstein-Barr virus in epithelial malignancies.

Tsao SW(1), Tsang CM, To KF, Lo KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Centre for Cancer Research, Li Ka Shing Faculty of
Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR.

The close association of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection with non-keratinizing
nasopharyngeal carcinomas and a subset of gastric carcinomas suggests that EBV
infection is a crucial event in these cancers. The difficulties encountered in
infecting and transforming primary epithelial cells in experimental systems
suggest that the role of EBV in epithelial malignancies is complex and
multifactorial in nature. Genetic alterations in the premalignant epithelium may 
support the establishment of latent EBV infection, which is believed to be an
initiation event. Oncogenic properties have been reported in multiple EBV latent 
genes. The BamH1 A rightwards transcripts (BARTs) and the BART-encoded microRNAs 
(miR-BARTs) are highly expressed in EBV-associated epithelial malignancies and
may induce malignant transformation. However, enhanced proliferation may not be
the crucial function of EBV infection in epithelial malignancies, at least in the
early stages of cancer development. EBV-encoded gene products may confer
anti-apoptotic properties and promote the survival of infected premalignant
epithelial cells harbouring genetic alterations. Multiple EBV-encoded microRNAs
have been reported to have immune evasion functions. Genetic alterations in host 
cells, as well as inflammatory stroma, could modulate the expression of EBV genes
and alter the growth properties of infected premalignant epithelial cells,
encouraging their selection during carcinogenesis.

Â© 2014 The Authors. The Journal of Pathology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
on behalf of Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

DOI: 10.1002/path.4448 
PMCID: PMC4280676
PMID: 25251730  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
