

48. Bull NYU Hosp Jt Dis. 2006;64(1-2):45-50.

Epstein-Barr virus infection induces lupus autoimmunity.

Harley JB(1), James JA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicineand Pathology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences
Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE or lupus) is a systemic autoimmune disease
characterized by a constellation of varied clinical presentations, although the
nearly universal presence of autoantibodies is a salient unifying feature.
Ongoing research efforts focus on understanding the complex combination of
genetic and environmental factors that lead to SLE in select individuals. Our
previous work has demonstrated that years before diagnosis abnormal autoantibody 
responses are present in the sera of patients who will subsequently develop lupus
and, further, that the initial targets of two of these key responses (anti-Sm B' 
and anti-60 kD Ro alone) have been identified for some patients. Indeed, our
results suggest that the first lupus-specific autoantibodies arise from
particular antibodies directed against Epstein-Barr virus Nuclear Antigen-1
(EBNA-1) and that infection with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is an environmental
risk factor for lupus. The predicted sequence of events is normal immunity,
followed by Epstein- Barr virus infection, the generation of anti-EBNA-1
antibodies, then followed by those particular anti-EBNA-1 antibodies that also
bind lupus-specific autoantigens (Sm or Ro), followed by the development of more 
complex autoimmune responses, and, finally, culminating in clinical disease.
Studies from others and those underway suggest that lupus patients have unusual
immune responses to Epstein-Barr virus. In aggregate, these results are
consistent with an immune response against Epstein-Barr virus being important in 
at least some patients for the initiation of lupus autoimmunity.


PMID: 17121489  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
