

7. Virology. 2017 Dec;512:113-123. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2017.09.015.

The Epstein-Barr virus miR-BHRF1 microRNAs regulate viral gene expression in cis.

Poling BC(1), Price AM(2), Luftig MA(3), Cullen BR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics & Microbiology and Center for Virology, Duke 
University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA. Electronic address:
Brigid.poling@duke.edu.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics & Microbiology and Center for Virology, Duke 
University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA. Electronic address:
price.alexander.m@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Molecular Genetics & Microbiology and Center for Virology, Duke 
University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA. Electronic address:
micah.luftig@duke.edu.
(4)Department of Molecular Genetics & Microbiology and Center for Virology, Duke 
University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA. Electronic address:
Bryan.cullen@duke.edu.

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) miR-BHRF1 microRNA (miRNA) cluster has been shown to
facilitate B-cell transformation and promote the rapid growth of the resultant
lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs). However, we find that expression of
physiological levels of the miR-BHRF1 miRNAs in LCLs transformed with a miR-BHRF1
null mutant (∆123) fails to increase their growth rate. We demonstrate that the
pri-miR-BHRF1-2 and 1-3 stem-loops are present in the 3'UTR of transcripts
encoding EBNA-LP and that excision of pre-miR-BHRF1-2 and 1-3 by Drosha
destabilizes these mRNAs and reduces expression of the encoded protein.
Therefore, mutational inactivation of pri-miR-BHRF1-2 and 1-3 in the ∆123 mutant 
upregulates the expression of not only EBNA-LP but also EBNA-LP-regulated mRNAs
and proteins, including LMP1. We hypothesize that this overexpression causes the 
reduced transformation capacity of the ∆123 EBV mutant. Thus, in addition to
regulating cellular mRNAs in trans, miR-BHRF1-2 and 1-3 also regulate EBNA-LP
mRNA expression in cis.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2017.09.015 
PMCID: PMC5653404
PMID: 28950226  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
