

9. J Virol. 2017 Nov 14;91(23). pii: e00920-17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00920-17. Print
2017 Dec 1.

Heterogeneity of the Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) Major Internal Repeat Reveals
Evolutionary Mechanisms of EBV and a Functional Defect in the Prototype EBV
Strain B95-8.

Ba Abdullah MM(1), Palermo RD(1), Palser AL(2), Grayson NE(2), Kellam P(1)(2)(3),
Correia S(1), Szymula A(1), White RE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Virology, Imperial College Faculty of Medicine, St. Mary's
Hospital, Norfolk Place, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(3)Kymab, Babraham Research Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(4)Section of Virology, Imperial College Faculty of Medicine, St. Mary's
Hospital, Norfolk Place, London, United Kingdom robert.e.white@imperial.ac.uk.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is a ubiquitous pathogen of humans that can cause
several types of lymphoma and carcinoma. Like other herpesviruses, EBV has
diversified through both coevolution with its host and genetic exchange between
virus strains. Sequence analysis of the EBV genome is unusually challenging
because of the large number and lengths of repeat regions within the virus. Here 
we describe the sequence assembly and analysis of the large internal repeat 1 of 
EBV (IR1; also known as the BamW repeats) for more than 70 strains. The diversity
of the latency protein EBV nuclear antigen leader protein (EBNA-LP) resides
predominantly within the exons downstream of IR1. The integrity of the putative
BWRF1 open reading frame (ORF) is retained in over 80% of strains, and deletions 
truncating IR1 always spare BWRF1. Conserved regions include the IR1 latency
promoter (Wp) and one zone upstream of and two within BWRF1. IR1 is heterogeneous
in 70% of strains, and this heterogeneity arises from sequence exchange between
strains as well as from spontaneous mutation, with interstrain recombination
being more common in tumor-derived viruses. This genetic exchange often
incorporates regions of <1 kb, and allelic gene conversion changes the frequency 
of small regions within the repeat but not close to the flanks. These
observations suggest that IR1-and, by extension, EBV-diversifies through both
recombination and breakpoint repair, while concerted evolution of IR1 is driven
by gene conversion of small regions. Finally, the prototype EBV strain B95-8
contains four nonconsensus variants within a single IR1 repeat unit, including a 
stop codon in the EBNA-LP gene. Repairing IR1 improves EBNA-LP levels and the
quality of transformation by the B95-8 bacterial artificial chromosome
(BAC).IMPORTANCE Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infects the majority of the world
population but causes illness in only a small minority of people. Nevertheless,
over 1% of cancers worldwide are attributable to EBV. Recent sequencing projects 
investigating virus diversity to see if different strains have different disease 
impacts have excluded regions of repeating sequence, as they are more technically
challenging. Here we analyze the sequence of the largest repeat in EBV (IR1). We 
first characterized the variations in protein sequences encoded across IR1. In
studying variations within the repeat of each strain, we identified a mutation in
the main laboratory strain of EBV that impairs virus function, and we suggest
that tumor-associated viruses may be more likely to contain DNA mixed from two
strains. The patterns of this mixing suggest that sequences can spread between
strains (and also within the repeat) by copying sequence from another strain (or 
repeat unit) to repair DNA damage.

Copyright Â© 2017 Ba abdullah et al.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00920-17 
PMCID: PMC5686732
PMID: 28904201  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
