

10. Retrovirology. 2015 Aug 12;12:70. doi: 10.1186/s12977-015-0198-9.

dUTPase: the frequently overlooked enzyme encoded by many retroviruses.

Hizi A(1), Herzig E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel 
Aviv University, 69978, Tel Aviv, Israel. ahizy@post.tau.ac.il.
(2)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel 
Aviv University, 69978, Tel Aviv, Israel. herzigey@post.tau.ac.il.

Erratum in
    Retrovirology. 2015;12:77.

Retroviruses are among the best studied viruses in last decades due to their
pivotal involvement in cellular processes and, most importantly, in causing human
diseases, most notably-acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) that is
triggered by human immunodeficiency viruses types 1 and 2 (HIV-1 and HIV-2,
respectively). Numerous studied were conducted to understand the involvement of
the three cardinal retroviral enzymes, reverse transcriptase, integrase and
protease, in the life cycle of the viruses. These studies have led to the
development of many inhibitors of these enzymes as anti-retroviral specific drugs
that are used for routine treatments of HIV/AIDS patients. Interestingly, a
fourth virus-encoded enzyme, the deoxyuridine 5'-triphosphate nucleotidohydrolase
(dUTPase) is also found in several major retroviral groups. The presence and the 
importance of this enzyme to the life cycle of retroviruses were usually
overlooked by most retrovirologists, although the occurrence of dUTPases,
particularly in beta-retroviruses and in non-primate retroviruses, is known for
more than 20 years. Only more recently, retroviral dUTPases were brought into the
limelight and were shown in several cases to be essential for viral replication. 
Therefore, it is likely that future studies on this enzyme will advance our
knowledge to a level that will allow designing novel, specific and potent
anti-dUTPase drugs that are effective in combating retroviral diseases. The aim
of this review is to give concise background information on dUTPases in general
and to summarize the most relevant data on retroviral dUTPases and their
involvement in the replication processes and pathogenicity of the viruses, as
well as in possibly-associated human diseases.

DOI: 10.1186/s12977-015-0198-9 
PMCID: PMC4531489
PMID: 26259899  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
