

18. Virol J. 2014 Dec 18;11:222. doi: 10.1186/s12985-014-0222-z.

Clearly different mechanisms of enhancement of short-lived Nef-mediated viral
infectivity between SIV and HIV-1.

Harada K(1), Takamune N(2)(3), Shoji S(4), Misumi S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Biochemistry, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto 
University, 5-1Oe-Honmachi, Chuo-ku, Kumamoto, 8620973, Japan.
tetsukuroe@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Biochemistry, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto 
University, 5-1Oe-Honmachi, Chuo-ku, Kumamoto, 8620973, Japan.
tkmnnbtk@gpo.kumamoto-u.ac.jp.
(3)Innovative Collaboration Organization, Kumamoto University, 2-39-1 Kurokami,
Chuo-ku, Kumamoto, 8608555, Japan. tkmnnbtk@gpo.kumamoto-u.ac.jp.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical Biochemistry, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto 
University, 5-1Oe-Honmachi, Chuo-ku, Kumamoto, 8620973, Japan.
shoji@gpo.kumamoto-u.ac.jp.
(5)Department of Pharmaceutical Biochemistry, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto 
University, 5-1Oe-Honmachi, Chuo-ku, Kumamoto, 8620973, Japan.
misumi@gpo.kumamoto-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: One of the major functions of Nef is in the enhancement of the
infectivity of the human and simian immunodeficiency viruses (HIV and SIV,
respectively). However, the detailed mechanism of the enhancement of viral
infectivity by Nef remains unclear. Additionally, studies of mechanisms by which 
Nef enhances the infectivity of SIV are not as intensive as those of HIV-1.
METHODS: We generated short-lived Nef constructed by fusing Nef to a
proteasome-mediated protein degradation sequence to characterize the Nef role in 
viral infectivity.
RESULTS: The apparent expression level of the short-lived Nef was found to be
extremely lower than that of the wild-type Nef. Moreover, the expression level of
the short-lived Nef increased with the treatment with a proteasome inhibitor. The
infectivity of HIV-1 with the short-lived Nef was significantly lower than that
with the wild-type Nef. On the other hand, the short-lived Nef enhanced the
infectivity of SIVmac239, an ability observed to be interestingly equivalent to
that of the wild-type Nef. The short-lived Nef was not detected in SIVmac239, but
the wild-type Nef was, suggesting that the incorporation of Nef into SIVmac239 is
not important for the enhancement of SIVmac239 infectivity.
CONCLUSIONS: Altogether, the findings suggest that the mechanisms of infectivity 
enhancement by Nef are different between HIV-1 and SIVmac239. Lastly, we propose 
the following hypothesis: even when the expression level of a protein is
extremely low, the protein may still be sufficiently functional.

DOI: 10.1186/s12985-014-0222-z 
PMCID: PMC4310179
PMID: 25519983  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
