

20. Virology. 2015 Jan 1;474:10-8. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2014.10.015. Epub 2014 Nov 7.

Primate lentiviruses are differentially inhibited by interferon-induced
transmembrane proteins.

Qian J(1), Le Duff Y(2), Wang Y(1), Pan Q(2), Ding S(3), Zheng YM(4), Liu SL(4), 
Liang C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3T
1E2; Department of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 2B4.
(2)Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3T
1E2.
(3)Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3T
1E2; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, McGill University, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada H3A 2B4.
(4)Department of Molecular Microbiology & Immunology, School of Medicine, Bond
Life Sciences Center, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211-7310, USA.
(5)Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3T
1E2; Department of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 2B4;
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada H3A 2B4. Electronic address: chen.liang@mcgill.ca.

Interferon-induced transmembrane (IFITM) proteins inhibit the entry of a large
number of viruses. Not surprisingly, many viruses are refractory to this
inhibition. In this study, we report that different strains of HIV and SIV are
inhibited by human IFITM proteins to various degrees, with SIV of African green
monkeys (SIV(AGM)) being mostly restricted by human IFITM2. Interestingly,
SIV(AGM) is as much inhibited by human IFITM2 as by IFITM3 of its own host
African green monkeys. Our data further demonstrate that the entry of SIV(AGM) is
impaired by human IFITM2 and that this inhibition is overcome by the
cholesterol-binding compound amphotericin B that also overcomes IFITM inhibition 
of influenza A viruses. These results suggest that IFITM proteins exploit similar
mechanisms to inhibit the entry of both pH-independent primate lentiviruses and
the pH-dependent influenza A viruses.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2014.10.015 
PMCID: PMC4581848
PMID: 25463599  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
