

23. PLoS One. 2014 May 5;9(5):e96554. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096554. eCollection 
2014.

Discrepant amplification results during the development of an assay leads to
reclassification of two AIDS reagent repository HIV-2 isolates as HIV-1.

Jagodzinski LL(1), Liu Y(2), Hack HR(2), Kibirige C(2), Peel SA(1), Manak MM(2).

Author information: 
(1)U.S. Military HIV Research Program, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research,
Silver Spring, Maryland, United States of America.
(2)U.S. Military HIV Research Program, Henry M. Jackson Foundation for the
Advancement of Military Medicine, Silver Spring, Maryland, United States of
America.

The development and verification of HIV-2 assays depends in part on the
availability of well-characterized samples, including those from reagent
repositories. During the development of an HIV-2 RNA quantification assay, two
HIV-2 viral isolates (CDC 301340 and CDC 301342) obtained from the NIAID AIDS
Reagent and Reference Repository were not detected leading to an investigation.
Two HIV-2 primers/probe sets of known performance in real-time viral RNA
quantification assays, targeting different regions of the virus, also failed to
generate RT-PCR products for these two isolates. These isolates were tested in
the HIV-1 specific COBAS AmpliPrep/COBAS TaqMan HIV-1 Test v2.0 (Roche Molecular 
Diagnostics) and were quantified at high copy number. Other HIV-2 isolates tested
were not amplified in the COBAS HIV-1 TaqMan assay. Furthermore, the discrepant
isolates were highly reactive in an HIV-1 p24 antigen test while the other HIV-2 
isolates showed very weak, if any, cross-reactivity with the HIV-1 p24 assay.
Phylogenetic tree analysis of sequences from the protease-reverse transcriptase
regions of the discrepant HIV-2 isolates mapped with HIV-1 Group M, Subtype
CRF02_AG confirming these isolates were of HIV-1 origin and had been
misclassified as HIV-2. The use of misclassified isolates in the verification of 
molecular and immunological assays can lead to misinterpretation of test results,
misdirection of efforts into assay redesign and increased development costs. The 
results of this study were shared with the NIAID AIDS Reagent Program, leading to
the reclassification of the two discrepant isolates as HIV-1.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096554 
PMCID: PMC4010467
PMID: 24797800  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
