

26. Retrovirology. 2014 Jan 10;11:3. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-11-3.

Novel restriction factor RNA-associated early-stage anti-viral factor (REAF)
inhibits human and simian immunodeficiency viruses.

Marno KM, Ogunkolade BW, Pade C, Oliveira NM, O'Sullivan E, McKnight √Å(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Immunology and Infectious Disease, Blizard Institute, Barts and The
London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London,
UK. a.mcknight@qmul.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: The discovery of novel anti-viral restriction factors illuminates
unknown aspects of innate sensing and immunity. We identified RNA-associated
Early-stage Anti-viral Factor (REAF) using a whole genome siRNA screen for
restriction factors to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) that act in the early
phase of viral replication.
RESULTS: We observed more than 50 fold rescue of HIV-1 infection, using a focus
forming unit (FFU) assay, following knockdown of REAF by specific siRNA.
Quantitative PCR was used to show that REAF knockdown results in an increase of
early and late reverse transcripts which impacts the level of integration. REAF
thus appears to act at an early stage of the viral life cycle during reverse
transcription. Conversely when REAF is over-expressed in target cells less
infected cells are detectable and fewer reverse transcripts are produced. Human
REAF can also inhibit HIV-2 and simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) infection.
REAF associates with viral nucleic acids and may act to prevent reverse
transcription.
CONCLUSIONS: This report firmly places REAF alongside APOBECs and SAMHD1 as a
potent inhibitor of HIV replication acting early in the replication cycle, just
after cell entry. We propose that REAF is part of an anti-viral surveillance
system destroying incoming retroviruses. This novel mechanism could apply to
invasion of cells by any intracellular pathogen.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-4690-11-3 
PMCID: PMC3895926
PMID: 24410916  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
