

32. Retrovirology. 2013 Jul 24;10:77. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-10-77.

Heterogeneous susceptibility of circulating SIV isolate capsids to
HIV-interacting factors.

Mamede JI(1), Sitbon M, Battini JL, Courgnaud V.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique Moléculaire de Montpellier UMR 5535 CNRS, 1919 Route de 
Mende, 34293 Montpellier Cedex 5, France.

BACKGROUND: Many species of non-human primates in Africa are naturally infected
by simian immunodeficiency viruses (SIV) and humans stand at the forefront of
exposure to these viruses in Sub-Saharan Africa. Cross-species transmission and
adaptation of SIV to humans have given rise to human immunodeficiency viruses
(HIV-1 and HIV-2) on twelve accountable, independent occasions. However, the
determinants contributing to a simian-to-human lasting transmission are not fully
understood. Following entry, viral cores are released into the cytoplasm and
become the principal target of host cellular factors. Here, we evaluated cellular
factors likely to be involved in potential new SIV cross-species transmissions.
We investigated the interactions of capsids from naturally circulating SIV
isolates with both HIV-1 restricting (i.e. TRIM5 proteins) and facilitating (i.e.
cyclophilin A and nucleopore-associated Nup358/RanBP2 and Nup153) factors in
single-round infectivity assays that reproduce early stages of the viral
life-cycle.
RESULTS: We show that human TRIM5α is unlikely to prevent cross-species
transmission of any SIV we tested and observed that the SIV CA-CypA interaction
is a widespread but not a universal feature. Moreover, entry in the nucleus of
different SIV appeared to follow pathways that do not necessarily recruit
Nup358/RanBP2 or Nup153, and this regardless of their interaction with CypA.
Nevertheless, we found that, like HIV-1, human-adapted HIV-2 infection was
dependent on Nup358/RanBP2 and Nup153 interactions for optimal infection.
Furthermore, we found that, unlike HIV CA, SIV CA did not require a direct
interaction with the Cyp-like domain of Nup358/RanBP2 to carry out successful
infection.
CONCLUSIONS: Circulating SIV present a variety of phenotypes with regard to
CA-interacting restricting or facilitating factors. Altogether, we unveiled
unidentified pathways for SIV CA, which could also be exploited by HIV in
different cellular contexts, to drive entry into the nucleus. Our findings
warrant a closer evaluation of other potential defenses against circulating SIV.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-4690-10-77 
PMCID: PMC3751554
PMID: 23883001  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
