

33. Retrovirology. 2013 Mar 5;10:26. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-10-26.

Restriction of diverse retroviruses by SAMHD1.

Gramberg T(1), Kahle T, Bloch N, Wittmann S, MÃ¼llers E, Daddacha W, Hofmann H,
Kim B, Lindemann D, Landau NR.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Department, New York University School of Medicine, New York,
USA. thomas.gramberg@viro.med.uni-erlangen.de

BACKGROUND: SAMHD1 is a triphosphohydrolase that restricts the replication of
HIV-1 and SIV in myeloid cells. In macrophages and dendritic cells, SAMHD1
restricts virus replication by diminishing the deoxynucleotide triphosphate pool 
to a level below that which supports lentiviral reverse transcription. HIV-2 and 
related SIVs encode the accessory protein Vpx to induce the proteasomal
degradation of SAMHD1 following virus entry. While SAMHD1 has been shown to
restrict HIV-1 and SIV, the breadth of its restriction is not known and whether
other viruses have a means to counteract the restriction has not been determined.
RESULTS: We show that SAMHD1 restricts a wide array of divergent retroviruses,
including the alpha, beta and gamma classes. Murine leukemia virus was restricted
by SAMHD1 in macrophages yet removal of SAMHD1 did not alleviate the block to
infection because of an additional block to viral nuclear import. Prototype foamy
virus (PFV) and Human T cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-1) were the only
retroviruses tested that were not restricted by SAMHD1. PFV reverse transcribes
predominantly prior to entry and thus is unaffected by the dNTP level in the
target cell. It is possible that HTLV-1 has a mechanism to render the virus
resistant to SAMHD1-mediated restriction.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that SAMHD1 has broad anti-retroviral activity
against which most viruses have not found an escape.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-4690-10-26 
PMCID: PMC3605129
PMID: 23497255  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
