

35. J Virol. 2013 Mar;87(5):2496-507. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01668-12. Epub 2012 Dec 19.

Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 promotes transcriptional repression of integrated
retroviruses.

Bueno MT(1), Reyes D, Valdes L, Saheba A, Urias E, Mendoza C, Fregoso OI, Llano
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso,
Texas, USA.

Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP-1) is a cellular enzyme with a fundamental
role in DNA repair and the regulation of chromatin structure, processes involved 
in the cellular response to retroviral DNA integration. However, the function of 
PARP-1 in retroviral DNA integration is controversial, probably due to the
functional redundancy of the PARP family in mammalian cells. We evaluated the
function of PARP-1 in retroviral infection using the chicken B lymphoblastoid
cell line DT40. These cells lack significant PARP-1 functional redundancy and
efficiently support the postentry early events of the mammalian-retrovirus
replication cycle. We observed that DT40 PARP-1(-/-) cells were 9- and 6-fold
more susceptible to infection by human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)- and
murine leukemia virus (MLV)-derived viral vectors, respectively, than cells
expressing PARP-1. Production of avian Rous-associated virus type 1 was also
impaired by PARP-1. However, the susceptibilities of these cell lines to
infection by the nonretrovirus vesicular stomatitis virus were indistinguishable.
Real-time PCR analysis of the HIV-1 life cycle demonstrated that PARP-1 did not
impair reverse transcription, nuclear import of the preintegration complex, or
viral DNA integration, suggesting that PARP-1 regulates a postintegration step.
In support of this hypothesis, pharmacological inhibition of the epigenetic
mechanism of transcriptional silencing increased retroviral expression in
PARP-1-expressing cells, suppressing the differences observed. Further analysis
of the implicated molecular mechanism indicated that PARP-1-mediated retroviral
silencing requires the C-terminal region, but not the enzymatic activity, of the 
protein. In sum, our data indicate a novel role of PARP-1 in the transcriptional 
repression of integrated retroviruses.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01668-12 
PMCID: PMC3571415
PMID: 23255787  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
