

37. Virology. 2013 Feb 5;436(1):81-90. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2012.10.029. Epub 2012
Nov 13.

Contribution of SAM and HD domains to retroviral restriction mediated by human
SAMHD1.

White TE(1), Brandariz-Nuñez A, Valle-Casuso JC, Amie S, Nguyen L, Kim B,
Brojatsch J, Diaz-Griffero F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine
Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

The human SAMHD1 protein is a novel retroviral restriction factor expressed in
myeloid cells. Previous work has correlated the deoxynucleotide
triphosphohydrolase activity of SAMHD1 with its ability to block HIV-1 and
SIV(mac) infection. SAMHD1 is comprised of the sterile alpha motif (SAM) and
histidine-aspartic (HD) domains; however the contribution of these domains to
retroviral restriction is not understood. Mutagenesis and deletion studies
revealed that expression of the sole HD domain of SAMHD1 is sufficient to achieve
potent restriction of HIV-1 and SIV(mac). We demonstrated that the HD domain of
SAMHD1 is essential for the ability of SAMHD1 to oligomerize by using a
biochemical assay. In agreement with previous observations, we mapped the
RNA-binding ability of SAMHD1 to the HD domain. We also demonstrated a direct
interaction of SAMHD1 with RNA by using enzymatically-active purified SAMHD1
protein from insect cells. Interestingly, we showed that double-stranded RNA
inhibits the enzymatic activity of SAMHD1 in vitro suggesting the possibility
that RNA from a pathogen might modulate the enzymatic activity of SAMHD1 in
cells. By contrast, we found that the SAM domain is dispensable for retroviral
restriction, oligomerization and RNA binding. Finally we tested the ability of
SAMHD1 to block the infection of retroviruses other than HIV-1 and SIV(mac).
These results showed that SAMHD1 blocks infection of HIV-2, feline
immunodeficiency virus (FIV), bovine immunodeficiency virus (BIV), Equine
infectious anemia virus (EIAV), N-tropic murine leukemia virus (N-MLV), and
B-tropic murine leukemia virus (B-MLV).

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2012.10.029 
PMCID: PMC3767443
PMID: 23158101  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
