

40. AIDS. 2012 Mar 27;26(6):659-73. doi: 10.1097/QAD.0b013e328350fb68.

Cross-species transmission of simian retroviruses: how and why they could lead to
the emergence of new diseases in the human population.

Locatelli S, Peeters M.

The HIV-1 group M epidemic illustrates the extraordinary impact and consequences 
resulting from a single zoonotic transmission. Exposure to blood or other
secretions of infected animals, through hunting and butchering of bushmeat, or
through bites and scratches inflicted by pet nonhuman primates (NHPs), represent 
the most plausible source for human infection with simian immunodeficiency virus 
(SIV), simian T-cell lymphotropic virus (STLV) and simian foamy virus. The chance
for cross-species transmissions could increase when frequency of exposure and
retrovirus prevalence is high. According to the most recent data, human exposure 
to SIV or STLV appears heterogeneous across the African countries surveyed.
Exposure is not sufficient to trigger disease: viral and host molecular
characteristics and compatibility are fundamental factors to establish infection.
A successful species jump is achieved when the pathogen becomes transmissible
between individuals within the new host population. To spread efficiently, HIV
likely required changes in human behavior. Given the increasing exposure to NHP
pathogens through hunting and butchering, it is likely that SIV and other simian 
viruses are still transmitted to the human population. The behavioral and
socio-economic context of the twenty-first century provides favorable conditions 
for the emergence and spread of new epidemics. Therefore, it is important to
evaluate which retroviruses the human population is exposed to and to better
understand how these viruses enter, infect, adapt and spread to its new host.

DOI: 10.1097/QAD.0b013e328350fb68 
PMID: 22441170  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
