

41. Methods Enzymol. 2012;507:29-57. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-386509-0.00003-X.

Retrovirus and lentivirus vector design and methods of cell conditioning.

Cooray S(1), Howe SJ, Thrasher AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Immunodeficiency, Molecular Immunology Unit, Institute of Child
Health, University College London, London, United Kingdom.

Retroviruses are useful tools for the efficient delivery of genes to mammalian
cells, owing to their ability to stably integrate into the host cell genome. Over
the past few decades, retroviral vectors have been used in gene therapy clinical 
trials for the treatment of a number of inherited diseases and cancers. The
earliest retrovirus vectors were based on simple oncogenic gammaretroviruses such
as Moloney murine leukemia virus (MMLV) which, when pseudotyped with envelope
proteins from other viruses such as the gibbon ape leukemia virus envelope
protein (GALV) or vesicular stomatitis virus G protein (VSV-G), can efficiently
introduce genes to a wide range of host cells. However, gammaretroviral vectors
have the disadvantage that they are unable to efficiently transduce nondividing
or slowly dividing cells. As a result, specific protocols have been developed to 
activate cells through the use of growth factors and cytokines. In the case of
hematopoietic stem cells, activation has to be carefully controlled so that
pluripotency is maintained. For many applications, gammaretroviral vectors are
being superseded by lentiviral vectors based on human immunodeficiency virus
type-1 (HIV-1) which has additional accessory proteins that enable integration in
the absence of cell division. In addition, retroviral and lentiviral vector
design has evolved to address a number of safety concerns. These include separate
expression of the viral genes in trans to prevent recombination events leading to
the generation of replication-competent viruses. Further, the development of
self-inactivating (SIN) vectors reduces the potential for transactivation of
neighboring genes and allows the incorporation of regulatory elements that may
target gene expression more physiologically to particular cell types.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-386509-0.00003-X 
PMID: 22365768  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
