

48. Vet Microbiol. 1992 Nov;33(1-4):311-31.

Animal immunodeficiency viruses.

Egberink H(1), Horzinek MC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, School of Veterinary Medicine, State University of
Utrecht, Netherlands.

Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) has morphological, physical and biochemical
characteristics similar to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), the cause of AIDS 
in man. However, it is antigenically and genetically distinct from HIV; an
antigenic relatedness with equine infectious anaemia virus has been demonstrated.
FIV has been molecularly cloned and sequenced. Diagnostic tests are commercially 
available and attempts at preparing inactivated, subunit and molecularly
engineered vaccines are being made in different laboratories. During FIV
infection a transient primary illness can be recognized, with fever, neutropenia 
and lymphadenopathy. After a long period of clinical normalcy a secondary stage
is distinguished with signs of an immunodeficiency-like syndrome. The incubation 
period for this stage can be as long as 5 years, during which gradual impairment 
of immune function develops. Many FIV-infected cats are presented for the first
time showing vague signs of illness: recurrent fevers, emaciation, lack of
appetite, lymphadenopathy, anaemia, leucopenia and behavioural changes. Later,
the predominant clinical signs observed are chronic stomatitis/gingivitis,
enteritis, upper respiratory tract infections, and infections of the skin.
Neoplasias, neurological, immunological and haematological disorder are seen in a
smaller proportion. The immunodeficiency-like syndrome is progressive over a
period of months to years. Concomitant infection with feline leukaemia virus has 
been shown to accelerate the progression of disease. In vitro, phenotypic mixing 
between FIV and an endogenous feline oncovirus (RD114) has been demonstrated
which leads to a broadening of the cell spectrum of the lentivirus. Bovine
immunodeficiency virus (BIV) has been isolated only once, and all attempts to
obtain additional isolates have failed; it has been recovered from the leucocytes
of cattle with persistent lymphocytosis, lymphadenopathy, lesions in the central 
nervous system, progressive weakness and emaciation. As with the feline
representative, BIV also was found to possess a lentivirus morphology and to
encode a reverse transcriptase with Mg++ preference; it replicates and induces
syncytia in a variety of embryonic bovine tissues in vitro. Antigenic analyses
have demonstrated a conservation of epitopes between the major core protein of
BIV and HIV. The original isolate has been molecularly cloned and sequenced.
Besides the three large open reading frames (ORFs) comprising the gag, pol, and
env genes common to all replication-competent retroviruses, five additional small
ORFs were found. Numerous point mutations and deletions were found, mostly in the
env-encoding ORF. These data suggest that, within a single virus isolate, BIV
displays extensive genomic variation.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)


PMID: 1336243  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
