

7. MBio. 2016 Feb 9;7(1):e02025-15. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02025-15.

Host RNA Packaging by Retroviruses: A Newly Synthesized Story.

Eckwahl MJ(1), Telesnitsky A(2), Wolin SL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut,
USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, USA.
(3)Department of Cell Biology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut,
USA Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut, USA sandra.wolin@yale.edu.

A fascinating aspect of retroviruses is their tendency to nonrandomly incorporate
host cell RNAs into virions. In addition to the specific tRNAs that prime reverse
transcription, all examined retroviruses selectively package multiple host cell
noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs). Many of these ncRNAs appear to be encapsidated shortly
after synthesis, before assembling with their normal protein partners.
Remarkably, although some packaged ncRNAs, such as pre-tRNAs and the spliceosomal
U6 small nuclear RNA (snRNA), were believed to reside exclusively within
mammalian nuclei, it was demonstrated recently that the model retrovirus murine
leukemia virus (MLV) packages these ncRNAs from a novel pathway in which unneeded
nascent ncRNAs are exported to the cytoplasm for degradation. The finding that
retroviruses package forms of ncRNAs that are rare in cells suggests several
hypotheses for how these RNAs could assist retrovirus assembly and infectivity.
Moreover, recent experiments in several laboratories have identified additional
ways in which cellular ncRNAs may contribute to the retrovirus life cycle. This
review focuses on the ncRNAs that are packaged by retroviruses and the ways in
which both encapsidated ncRNAs and other cellular ncRNAs may contribute to
retrovirus replication.

Copyright Â© 2016 Eckwahl et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02025-15 
PMCID: PMC4752605
PMID: 26861021  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
