

13. Annu Rev Virol. 2017 Sep 29;4(1):241-260. doi:
10.1146/annurev-virology-101416-041654.

Making Sense of Multifunctional Proteins: Human Immunodeficiency Virus Type 1
Accessory and Regulatory Proteins and Connections to Transcription.

Faust TB(1), Binning JM(2), Gross JD(2), Frankel AD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, San
Francisco, California 94158; email: tybifa@gmail.com , frankel@cgl.ucsf.edu.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of California, San
Francisco, California 94158; email: jennifer.binning@ucsf.edu ,
jdgross@cgl.ucsf.edu.

Viruses are completely dependent upon cellular machinery to support replication
and have therefore developed strategies to co-opt cellular processes to optimize 
infection and counter host immune defenses. Many viruses, including human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1), encode a relatively small number of genes.
Viruses with limited genetic content often encode multifunctional proteins that
function at multiple stages of the viral replication cycle. In this review, we
discuss the functions of HIV-1 regulatory (Tat and Rev) and accessory (Vif, Vpr, 
Vpu, and Nef) proteins. Each of these proteins has a highly conserved primary
activity; however, numerous additional activities have been attributed to these
viral proteins. We explore the possibility that HIV-1 proteins leverage their
multifunctional nature to alter host transcriptional networks to elicit a diverse
set of cellular responses. Although these transcriptional effects appear to
benefit the virus, it is not yet clear whether they are strongly selected for
during viral evolution or are a ripple effect from the primary function. As our
detailed knowledge of these viral proteins improves, we will undoubtedly uncover 
how the multifunctional nature of these HIV-1 regulatory and accessory proteins, 
and in particular their transcriptional functions, work to drive viral
pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-virology-101416-041654 
PMCID: PMC5750048
PMID: 28961413  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
