

16. J Alzheimers Dis. 2017;60(s1):S169-S193. doi: 10.3233/JAD-170473.

An Overview of Human Immunodeficiency Virus Type 1-Associated Common Neurological
Complications: Does Aging Pose a Challenge?

Nookala AR(1), Mitra J(2), Chaudhari NS(1), Hegde ML(2)(3), Kumar A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Pharmacy, University of
Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, MO, USA.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Houston Methodist Research Institute,
Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell University, NY, USA.

With increasing survival of patients infected with human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 (HIV-1), the manifestation of heterogeneous neurological complications is 
also increasing alarmingly in these patients. Currently, more than 30% of about
40 million HIV-1 infected people worldwide develop central nervous system
(CNS)-associated dysfunction, including dementia, sensory, and motor neuropathy. 
Furthermore, the highly effective antiretroviral therapy has been shown to
increase the prevalence of mild cognitive functions while reducing other
HIV-1-associated neurological complications. On the contrary, the presence of
neurological disorder frequently affects the outcome of conventional HIV-1
therapy. Although, both the children and adults suffer from the post-HIV
treatment-associated cognitive impairment, adults, especially depending on the
age of disease onset, are more prone to CNS dysfunction. Thus, addressing
neurological complications in an HIV-1-infected patient is a delicate balance of 
several factors and requires characterization of the molecular signature of
associated CNS disorders involving intricate cross-talk with HIV-1-derived
neurotoxins and other cellular factors. In this review, we summarize some of the 
current data supporting both the direct and indirect mechanisms, including
neuro-inflammation and genome instability in association with aging, leading to
CNS dysfunction after HIV-1 infection, and discuss the potential strategies
addressing the treatment or prevention of HIV-1-mediated neurotoxicity.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-170473 
PMCID: PMC6152920
PMID: 28800335  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
