

30. ACS Nano. 2017 Apr 25;11(4):3890-3903. doi: 10.1021/acsnano.7b00275. Epub 2017
Apr 6.

Single-Particle Tracking of Human Immunodeficiency Virus Type 1 Productive Entry 
into Human Primary Macrophages.

Li Q(1)(2), Li W(2), Yin W(2), Guo J(3), Zhang ZP(2), Zeng D(2), Zhang X(2), Wu
Y(3), Zhang XE(4), Cui Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology , Wuhan 430074, P.R. China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences , Wuhan 430071, P.R. China.
(3)National Center for Biodefense and Infectious Diseases, Department of
Molecular and Microbiology, George Mason University , Manassas, Virginia 20110,
United States.
(4)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, CAS Center for Excellence in
Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences , Beijing
100101, P.R. China.

Macrophages are one of the major targets of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1),
but the viral entry pathway remains poorly understood in these cells. Noninvasive
virus labeling and single-virus tracking are effective tools for studying virus
entry. Here, we constructed a quantum dot (QD)-encapsulated infectious HIV-1
particle to track viral entry at a single-particle level in live human primary
macrophages. QDs were encapsulated in HIV-1 virions by incorporating viral
accessory protein Vpr-conjugated QDs during virus assembly. With the HIV-1
particles encapsulating QDs, we monitored the early phase of viral infection in
real time and observed that, during infection, HIV-1 was endocytosed in a
clathrin-mediated manner; the particles were translocated into Rab5A-positive
endosomes, and the core was released into the cytoplasm by viral
envelope-mediated endosomal fusion. Drug inhibition assays verified that endosome
fusion contributes to HIV-1 productive infection in primary macrophages.
Additionally, we observed that a dynamic actin cytoskeleton is critical for HIV-1
entry and intracellular migration in primary macrophages. HIV-1 dynamics and
infection could be blocked by multiple different actin inhibitors. Our study
revealed a productive entry pathway in macrophages that requires both endosomal
function and actin dynamics, which may assist in the development of inhibitors to
block the HIV entry in macrophages.

DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.7b00275 
PMID: 28371581  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
