

34. J Gen Virol. 2016 Dec;97(12):3413-3426. doi: 10.1099/jgv.0.000641. Epub 2016 Oct 
21.

Simian immunodeficiency virus SIVmac239 infection and simian human
immunodeficiency virus SHIV89.6P infection result in progression to AIDS in
cynomolgus macaques of Asian origin.

Okamura T(1), Tsujimura Y(1), Soma S(2), Takahashi I(1), Matsuo K(3), Yasutomi
Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)1​Laboratory of Immunoregulation and Vaccine Research, Tsukuba Primate
Research Center, National Institutes of Biomedical Innovation, Health and
Nutrition, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0843, Japan.
(2)1​Laboratory of Immunoregulation and Vaccine Research, Tsukuba Primate
Research Center, National Institutes of Biomedical Innovation, Health and
Nutrition, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0843, Japan 2​Division of Immunoregulation,
Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, Mie University Graduate School
of Medicine, Tsu, Mie 514-8507, Japan.
(3)3​Research and Development Department, Japan BCG Laboratory, Kiyose, Tokyo
204-0022, Japan.

Simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) infection models in cynomolgus macaques are
important for analysis of the pathogenesis of immunodeficiency virus and for
studies on the efficacy of new vaccine candidates. However, very little is known 
about the pathogenesis of SIV or simian human immunodeficiency virus (SHIV) in
cynomolgus macaques from different Asian countries. In the present study, we
analysed the infectivity and pathogenicity of CCR5-tropic SIVmac and those of
dual-tropic SHIV89.6P inoculated into cynomolgus macaques in Indonesian,
Malaysian or Philippine origin. The plasma viral loads in macaques infected with 
either SIVmac239 or SHIV89.6P were maintained at high levels. CD4+ T cell levels 
in macaques infected with SIVmac239 gradually decreased. All of the macaques
infected with SHIV89.6P showed greatly reduced CD4+ T-cell numbers within 6 weeks
of infection. Eight of the 11 macaques infected with SIVmac239 were killed due to
AIDS symptoms after 2-4.5 years, while four of the five macaques infected with
SHIV89.6P were killed due to AIDS symptoms after 1-3.5 years. We also analysed
cynomolgus macaques infected intrarectally with repeated low, medium or high
doses of SIVmac239, SIVmac251 or SHIV89.6P. Infection was confirmed by
quantitative RT-PCR at more than 5000, 300 and 500 TCID50 for SIVmac239,
SIVmac251 and SHIV89.6P, respectively. The present study indicates that
cynomolgus macaques of Asian origin are highly susceptible to SIVmac and SHIV
infection by both intravenous and mucosal routes. These models will be useful for
studies on virus pathogenesis, vaccination and therapeutics against human
immunodeficiency virus/AIDS.

DOI: 10.1099/jgv.0.000641 
PMID: 27902330  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
