

36. Viral Immunol. 2017 Jan/Feb;30(1):28-34. doi: 10.1089/vim.2016.0084. Epub 2016
Nov 3.

Human Immunodeficiency Virus-1 Impairs IFN-Alpha Production Induced by TLR-7
Agonist in Plasmacytoid Dendritic Cells.

Dhamanage A(1), Thakar M(1), Paranjape R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, National AIDS Research Institute , Pune, India .

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) play an important role in innate immune
response against viruses, mainly through interferon-α (IFN-α) secretion. Impaired
IFN-α secretion has been observed in patients with acute human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection and the reasons for this impairment are still
obscure. To know the grounds behind this situation, HIV-1 viral copy numbers
similar to those found in primary HIV-1 infection were used to stimulate
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and pDCs in this study. Intracellular 
IFN-α production was seen as early as 2 h in pDCs with TLR-7 agonist (imiquimod) 
stimulation, but HIV-1 required 48 h to induce secretion of IFN-α in supernatants
and it was 10 times less compared to imiquimod. Thus, it shows that HIV-1 delays 
and impairs IFN-α production from pDCs. Furthermore, the IFN-α inhibitory
activity of HIV-1 was checked by stimulating PBMCs and pDCs with imiquimod either
simultaneously with HIV-1 or after 2 h pre-exposure to HIV-1. Pre-exposure to
HIV-1 resulted in significant reduction in IFN-α secretion by pDCs and PBMCs when
compared to imiquimod alone. In addition, simultaneous stimulation of these
populations with HIV-1 and imiquimod resulted in significant impairment in IFN-α 
production in pDCs but not in PBMCs. HIV-1 not only fails to induce IFN-α in
adequate quantities but also inhibits IFN-α secretary capacity of pDCs. HIV-1
particles were found to bind CD303 receptor on pDC surface probably blocking
initiation of cascade leading to IFN-α impairment. The understanding of the
pathways that lead to this suppression may help in devising the HIV control
strategies.

DOI: 10.1089/vim.2016.0084 
PMID: 27809682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
