

37. J Virol. 2016 Oct 28;90(22):10193-10208. Print 2016 Nov 15.

Vif Proteins from Diverse Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Simian Immunodeficiency
Virus Lineages Have Distinct Binding Sites in A3C.

Zhang Z(1), Gu Q(1), Jaguva Vasudevan AA(1), Jeyaraj M(1), Schmidt S(2), Zielonka
J(1), Perković M(1)(2), Heckel JO(3), Cichutek K(2), Häussinger D(1), Smits
SH(4), Münk C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Clinic for Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Infectiology, Medical Faculty,
Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(2)Department of Medical Biotechnology, Paul-Ehrlich-Institut, Langen, Germany.
(3)Zoo Landau in der Pfalz, Landau in der Pfalz, Germany.
(4)Institute of Biochemistry, Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, 
Germany.
(5)Clinic for Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Infectiology, Medical Faculty,
Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany
carsten.muenk@med.uni-duesseldorf.de.

Lentiviruses have evolved the Vif protein to counteract APOBEC3 (A3) restriction 
factors by targeting them for proteasomal degradation. Previous studies have
identified important residues in the interface of human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 (HIV-1) Vif and human APOBEC3C (hA3C) or human APOBEC3F (hA3F). However,
the interaction between primate A3C proteins and HIV-1 Vif or natural HIV-1 Vif
variants is still poorly understood. Here, we report that HIV-1 Vif is inactive
against A3Cs of rhesus macaques (rhA3C), sooty mangabey monkeys (smmA3C), and
African green monkeys (agmA3C), while HIV-2, African green monkey simian
immunodeficiency virus (SIVagm), and SIVmac Vif proteins efficiently mediate the 
depletion of all tested A3Cs. We identified that residues N/H130 and Q133 in
rhA3C and smmA3C are determinants for this HIV-1 Vif-triggered counteraction. We 
also found that the HIV-1 Vif interaction sites in helix 4 of hA3C and hA3F
differ. Vif alleles from diverse HIV-1 subtypes were tested for degradation
activities related to hA3C. The subtype F-1 Vif was identified to be inactive for
degradation of hA3C and hA3F. The residues that determined F-1 Vif inactivity in 
the degradation of A3C/A3F were located in the C-terminal region (K167 and D182).
Structural analysis of F-1 Vif revealed that impairing the internal salt bridge
of E171-K167 restored reduction capacities to A3C/A3F. Furthermore, we found that
D101 could also form an internal interaction with K167. Replacing D101 with
glycine and R167 with lysine in NL4-3 Vif impaired its counteractivity to A3F and
A3C. This finding indicates that internal interactions outside the A3 binding
region in HIV-1 Vif influence the capacity to induce degradation of
A3C/A3F.IMPORTANCE: The APOBEC3 restriction factors can serve as potential
barriers to lentiviral cross-species transmissions. Vif proteins from
lentiviruses counteract APOBEC3 by proteasomal degradation. In this study, we
found that monkey-derived A3C, rhA3C and smmA3C, were resistant to HIV-1 Vif.
This was determined by A3C residues N/H130 and Q133. However, HIV-2, SIVagm, and 
SIVmac Vif proteins were found to be able to mediate the depletion of all tested 
primate A3C proteins. In addition, we identified a natural HIV-1 Vif (F-1 Vif)
that was inactive in the degradation of hA3C/hA3F. Here, we provide for the first
time a model that explains how an internal salt bridge of E171-K167-D101
influences Vif-mediated degradation of hA3C/hA3F. This finding provides a novel
way to develop HIV-1 inhibitors by targeting the internal interactions of the Vif
protein.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01497-16 
PMCID: PMC5105656
PMID: 27581978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
