

4. Cell Chem Biol. 2018 Jan 18;25(1):36-49. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2017.10.007.
Epub 2017 Nov 16.

APOBEC Enzymes as Targets for Virus and Cancer Therapy.

Olson ME(1), Harris RS(2), Harki DA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN
55455, USA.
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN
55455, USA; Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Biophysics,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA; Institute for Molecular
Virology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA; Masonic Cancer
Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA; Stem Cell Institute,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.
(3)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN
55455, USA; Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Biophysics,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA; Masonic Cancer Center,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA; Department of Chemistry,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA; Stem Cell Institute,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. Electronic address:
daharki@umn.edu.

Human DNA cytosine-to-uracil deaminases catalyze mutations in both pathogen and
cellular genomes. APOBEC3D, APOBEC3F, APOBEC3G, and APOBEC3H restrict human
immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) infection in cells deficient in the viral
infectivity factor (Vif), and have the potential to catalyze sublethal levels of 
mutation in viral genomes in Vif-proficient cells. At least two APOBEC3 enzymes, 
and in particular APOBEC3B, are sources of somatic mutagenesis in cancer cells
that drive tumor evolution and may manifest clinically as recurrence, metastasis,
and/or therapy resistance. Consequently, APOBEC3 enzymes are tantalizing targets 
for developing chemical probes and therapeutic molecules to harness mutational
processes in human disease. This review highlights recent efforts to chemically
manipulate APOBEC3 activities.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2017.10.007 
PMCID: PMC5775913
PMID: 29153851  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
