

43. Jpn J Infect Dis. 2017 Mar 24;70(2):171-176. doi: 10.7883/yoken.JJID.2015.464.
Epub 2016 Jun 30.

The Epidemic of Human Immunodeficiency Virus, Hepatitis C Virus, and Syphilis
Infection, and the Correlates of Sexually Transmitted Infections among Men Who
Have Sex with Men in Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, China.

Shen L(1), Liu X, Fu G, Hao S, Zhang M, Wang T, Yang J, Wu X, Mao L.

Author information: 
(1)Zhenjiang Center for Disease Control and Prevention.

A cross sectional survey was performed to investigate the epidemic of human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis C virus (HCV), syphilis, and HIV-1
subtype infections among men who have sex with men (MSM) and to evaluate factors 
that were correlated with sexually transmitted infections (STIs) among 657 MSM in
Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, during 2012-2013. Data on socio-demographic parameters and
risky behaviors were collected, and blood samples were obtained. In this survey, 
the prevalence of STIs due to HIV (5.3%), HCV (0.6%), and syphilis (19.2%) were
measured. Of 35 HIV-infected MSM, 1 (0.2%) and 17 (2.6%) were co-infected with
HCV and syphilis. Among 33 samples with available HIV-1 genomic fragment
sequences, 6.1% B, 72.7% CRF01_AE, and 21.2% CRF07_BC were identified.
Multivariate logistic regression analysis showed that age > 30 years (odds ratio 
[OR] 2.002; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.144-3.502) and having had STI
symptoms in the past year (OR, 11.673; 95% CI, 3.092-44.078) were positively
correlated with having an STI, while consistent use of a condom when having sex
with male partners (OR, 0.621; 95% CI, 0.408-0.945) was significantly associated 
with a low STI rate. The worsening epidemic of HIV, HCV, and syphilis infections,
and the prevalence of complex subtypes of HIV-1 and other risk factors suggest
that effective intervention strategies should be strengthened for MSM in
Zhenjiang, Jiangsu.

DOI: 10.7883/yoken.JJID.2015.464 
PMID: 27357977  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
