

44. J Virol. 2016 Aug 12;90(17):7607-17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00407-16. Print 2016 Sep 1.

Cell-Free versus Cell-to-Cell Infection by Human Immunodeficiency Virus Type 1
and Human T-Lymphotropic Virus Type 1: Exploring the Link among Viral Source,
Viral Trafficking, and Viral Replication.

Dutartre H(1), Clavière M(2), Journo C(2), Mahieux R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Equipe Oncogenèse Rétrovirale, Equipe Labellisée Ligue Nationale Contre le
Cancer, Centre International de Recherche en Infectiologie INSERM U1111-CNRS
UMR5308, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Université de Lyon 1, and LabEx
ECOFECT, Université Lyon, Lyon, France helene.dutartre@ens-lyon.fr.
(2)Equipe Oncogenèse Rétrovirale, Equipe Labellisée Ligue Nationale Contre le
Cancer, Centre International de Recherche en Infectiologie INSERM U1111-CNRS
UMR5308, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Université de Lyon 1, and LabEx
ECOFECT, Université Lyon, Lyon, France.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) and human T-lymphotropic virus type 1
(HTLV-1) are complex retroviruses mainly infecting CD4(+) T lymphocytes. In
addition, antigen-presenting cells such as dendritic cells (DCs) are targeted in 
vivo by both viruses, although to a lesser extent. Interaction of HIV-1 with DCs 
plays a key role in viral dissemination from the mucosa to CD4(+) T lymphocytes
present in lymphoid organs. While similar mechanisms may occur for HTLV-1 as
well, most HTLV-1 data were obtained from T-cell studies, and little is known
regarding the trafficking of this virus in DCs. We first compared the efficiency 
of cell-free versus cell-associated viral sources of both retroviruses at
infecting DCs. We showed that both HIV-1 and HTLV-1 cell-free particles are
poorly efficient at productively infecting DCs, except when DC-SIGN has been
engaged. Furthermore, while SAMHD-1 accounts for restriction of cell-free HIV-1
infection, it is not involved in HTLV-1 restriction. In addition, cell-free
viruses lead mainly to a nonproductive DC infection, leading to trans-infection
of T-cells, a process important for HIV-1 spread but not for that of HTLV-1.
Finally, we show that T-DC cell-to-cell transfer implies viral trafficking in
vesicles that may both increase productive infection of DCs ("cis-infection") and
allow viral escape from immune surveillance. Altogether, these observations
allowed us to draw a model of HTLV-1 and HIV-1 trafficking in DCs.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00407-16 
PMCID: PMC4988172
PMID: 27334587  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
