

45. PLoS One. 2016 Jun 16;11(6):e0157709. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0157709.
eCollection 2016.

Dual Simian Foamy Virus/Human Immunodeficiency Virus Type 1 Infections in Persons
from C么te d'Ivoire.

Switzer WM(1), Tang S(1), Zheng H(1), Shankar A(1), Sprinkle PS(1), Sullivan
V(1), Granade TC(1), Heneine W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral
Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Atlanta, GA 30329, United States of America.

Zoonotic transmission of simian retroviruses in West-Central Africa occurring in 
primate hunters has resulted in pandemic spread of human immunodeficiency viruses
(HIVs) and human T-lymphotropic viruses (HTLVs). While simian foamy virus (SFV)
and simian T- lymphotropic virus (STLV)-like infection were reported in healthy
persons exposed to nonhuman primates (NHPs) in West-Central Africa, less is known
about the distribution of these viruses in Western Africa and in hospitalized
populations. We serologically screened for SFV and STLV infection using 1,529
specimens collected between 1985 and 1997 from C么te d'Ivoire patients with high
HIV prevalence. PCR amplification and analysis of SFV, STLV, and HIV/SIV
sequences from PBMCs was used to investigate possible simian origin of infection.
We confirmed SFV antibodies in three persons (0.2%), two of whom were
HIV-1-infected. SFV polymerase (pol) and LTR sequences were detected in PBMC DNA 
available for one HIV-infected person. Phylogenetic comparisons with new SFV
sequences from African guenons showed infection likely originated from a
Chlorocebus sabaeus monkey endemic to C么te d'Ivoire. 4.6% of persons were HTLV
seropositive and PCR testing of PBMCs from 15 HTLV seroreactive persons
identified nine with HTLV-1 and one with HTLV-2 LTR sequences. Phylogenetic
analysis showed that two persons had STLV-1-like infections, seven were HTLV-1,
and one was an HTLV-2 infection. 310/858 (53%), 8/858 (0.93%), and 18/858 (2.1%) 
were HIV-1, HIV-2, and HIV-positive but undifferentiated by serology,
respectively. No SIV sequences were found in persons with HIV-2 antibodies (n =
1) or with undifferentiated HIV results (n = 7). We document SFV, STLV-1-like,
and dual SFV/HIV infection in C么te d'Ivoire expanding the geographic range for
zoonotic simian retrovirus transmission to West Africa. These findings highlight 
the need to define the public health consequences of these infections. Studying
dual HIV-1/SFV infections in immunocompromised populations may provide a new
opportunity to better understand SFV pathogenicity and transmissibility in
humans.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0157709 
PMCID: PMC4911074
PMID: 27310836  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
