

46. J Virol. 2016 Aug 12;90(17):7596-606. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00672-16. Print 2016 Sep
1.

Macrophages in Progressive Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Simian Immunodeficiency
Virus Infections.

DiNapoli SR(1), Hirsch VM(2), Brenchley JM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA
jbrenchl@mail.nih.gov.

The cells that are targeted by primate lentiviruses (HIV and simian
immunodeficiency virus [SIV]) are of intense interest given the renewed effort to
identify potential cures for HIV. These viruses have been reported to infect
multiple cell lineages of hematopoietic origin, including all phenotypic and
functional CD4 T cell subsets. The two most commonly reported cell types that
become infected in vivo are memory CD4 T cells and tissue-resident macrophages.
Though viral infection of CD4 T cells is routinely detected in both HIV-infected 
humans and SIV-infected Asian macaques, significant viral infection of
macrophages is only routinely observed in animal models wherein CD4 T cells are
almost entirely depleted. Here we review the roles of macrophages in lentiviral
disease progression, the evidence that macrophages support viral replication in
vivo, the animal models where macrophage-mediated replication of SIV is thought
to occur, how the virus can interact with macrophages in vivo, pathologies
thought to be attributed to viral replication within macrophages, how viral
replication in macrophages might contribute to the asymptomatic phase of HIV/SIV 
infection, and whether macrophages represent a long-lived reservoir for the
virus.

Copyright Â© 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00672-16 
PMCID: PMC4988166
PMID: 27307568  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
