

47. RNA. 2016 Aug;22(8):1228-38. doi: 10.1261/rna.057299.116. Epub 2016 May 31.

Analysis of the human immunodeficiency virus-1 RNA packageome.

Eckwahl MJ(1), Arnion H(1), Kharytonchyk S(2), Zang T(3), Bieniasz PD(3),
Telesnitsky A(2), Wolin SL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut
06536, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan 48109, USA.
(3)Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Center, The Rockefeller University, New York, New 
York 10016, USA Laboratory of Retrovirology, The Rockefeller University, New
York, New York 10016, USA Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Rockefeller
University, New York, New York 10016, USA.
(4)Department of Cell Biology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut
06536, USA Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06536, USA Yale Cancer Center, Yale School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

All retroviruses package cellular RNAs into virions. Studies of murine leukemia
virus (MLV) revealed that the major host cell RNAs encapsidated by this simple
retrovirus were LTR retrotransposons and noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs). Several classes
of ncRNAs appeared to be packaged by MLV shortly after synthesis, as precursors
to tRNAs, small nuclear RNAs, and small nucleolar RNAs were all enriched in
virions. To determine the extent to which the human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV-1) packages similar RNAs, we used high-throughput sequencing to characterize
the RNAs within infectious HIV-1 virions produced in CEM-SS T lymphoblastoid
cells. We report that the most abundant cellular RNAs in HIV-1 virions are 7SL
RNA and transcripts from numerous divergent and truncated members of the long
interspersed element (LINE) and short interspersed element (SINE) families of
retrotransposons. We also detected precursors to several tRNAs and small nuclear 
RNAs as well as transcripts derived from the ribosomal DNA (rDNA) intergenic
spacers. We show that packaging of a pre-tRNA requires the nuclear export
receptor Exportin 5, indicating that HIV-1 recruits at least some newly made
ncRNAs in the cytoplasm. Together, our work identifies the set of RNAs packaged
by HIV-1 and reveals that early steps in HIV-1 assembly intersect with host cell 
ncRNA biogenesis pathways.

Â© 2016 Eckwahl et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the
RNA Society.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.057299.116 
PMCID: PMC4931115
PMID: 27247436  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
