

9. Int J Mol Sci. 2017 Oct 3;18(10). pii: E2091. doi: 10.3390/ijms18102091.

Human Immunodeficiency Virus Proteins Mimic Human T Cell Receptors Inducing
Cross-Reactive Antibodies.

Root-Bernstein R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Michigan State University, 567 Wilson Road, Room
2201, East Lansing, MI 48824 USA. rootbern@msu.edu.

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) hides from the immune system in part by
mimicking host antigens, including human leukocyte antigens. It is demonstrated
here that HIV also mimics the V-β-D-J-β of approximately seventy percent of about
600 randomly selected human T cell receptors (TCR). This degree of mimicry is
greater than any other human pathogen, commensal or symbiotic organism studied.
These data suggest that HIV may be evolving into a commensal organism just as
simian immunodeficiency virus has done in some types of monkeys. The gp120
envelope protein, Nef protein and Pol protein are particularly similar to host
TCR, camouflaging HIV from the immune system and creating serious barriers to the
development of safe HIV vaccines. One consequence of HIV mimicry of host TCR is
that antibodies against HIV proteins have a significant probability of
recognizing the corresponding TCR as antigenic targets, explaining the widespread
observation of lymphocytotoxic autoantibodies in acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (AIDS). Quantitative enzyme-linked immunoadsorption assays (ELISA)
demonstrated that every HIV antibody tested recognized at least one of twelve
TCR, and as many as seven, with a binding constant in the 10-8 to 10-9 m range.
HIV immunity also affects microbiome tolerance in ways that correlate with
susceptibility to specific opportunistic infections.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms18102091 
PMCID: PMC5666773
PMID: 28972547  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
