

10. MBio. 2017 Mar 14;8(2). pii: e02020-16. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02020-16.

Plaques Formed by Mutagenized Viral Populations Have Elevated Coinfection
Frequencies.

Aguilera ER(1), Erickson AK(1), Jesudhasan PR(1), Robinson CM(1), Pfeiffer JK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas, USA Julie.Pfeiffer@UTSouthwestern.edu.

Comment in
    MBio. 2017 Aug 8;8(4):null.
    MBio. 2017 Aug 8;8(4):null.

The plaque assay is a common technique used to measure virus concentrations and
is based upon the principle that each plaque represents a single infectious unit.
As such, the number of plaques is expected to correlate linearly with the virus
dilution plated, and each plaque should be formed by a single founder virus.
Here, we examined whether more than one virus can contribute to plaque formation.
By using genetic and phenotypic assays with genetically marked polioviruses, we
found that multiple parental viruses are present in 5 to 7% of plaques, even at
an extremely low multiplicity of infection. We demonstrated through visual and
biophysical assays that, like many viral stocks, our viral stocks contain both
single particles and aggregates. These data suggest that aggregated virions are
capable of inducing coinfection and chimeric plaque formation. In fact, inducing 
virion aggregation via exposure to low pH increased coinfection in a flow
cytometry-based assay. We hypothesized that plaques generated by viruses with
high mutation loads may have higher coinfection frequencies due to processes
restoring fitness, such as complementation and recombination. Indeed, we found
that coinfection frequency correlated with mutation load, with 17% chimeric
plaque formation for heavily mutagenized viruses. Importantly, the frequency of
chimeric plaques may be underestimated by up to threefold, since coinfection with
the same parental virus cannot be scored in our assay. This work indicates that
more than one virus can contribute to plaque formation and that coinfection may
assist plaque formation in situations where the amount of genome damage is
high.IMPORTANCE One of the most common methods to quantify viruses is the plaque 
assay, where it is generally presumed that each plaque represents a single
infectious virus. Using genetically marked polioviruses, we demonstrate that a
plaque can contain more than one parental virus, likely due to aggregates within 
virus stocks that induce coinfection of a cell. A relatively small number of
plaques are the products of coinfection for our standard virus stocks. However,
mutagenized virus stocks with increased genome damage give rise to a higher
amount of plaques that are chimeric. These results suggest that coinfection may
aid plaque formation of viruses with genome damage, possibly due to processes
such as complementation and recombination. Overall, our results suggest that the 
relationship between viral dilution and plaque number may not be linear,
particularly for mutagenized viral populations.

Copyright Â© 2017 Aguilera et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02020-16 
PMCID: PMC5350468
PMID: 28292984  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
