

16. Methods Mol Biol. 2016;1387:177-212. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-3292-4_9.

Molecular Properties of Poliovirus Isolates: Nucleotide Sequence Analysis, Typing
by PCR and Real-Time RT-PCR.

Burns CC(1), Kilpatrick DR(2), Iber JC(2), Chen Q(2), Kew OM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Polio and Picornavirus Laboratory Branch, Division of Viral Diseases, National
Center for Immunization and Respiratory Disease, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, 1600 Clifton Rd., NE MS G-10, Atlanta, GA, 30333, USA.
cburns@cdc.gov.
(2)Polio and Picornavirus Laboratory Branch, Division of Viral Diseases, National
Center for Immunizationand Respiratory Disease, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA.

Virologic surveillance is essential to the success of the World Health
Organization initiative to eradicate poliomyelitis. Molecular methods have been
used to detect polioviruses in tissue culture isolates derived from stool samples
obtained through surveillance for acute flaccid paralysis. This chapter describes
the use of realtime PCR assays to identify and serotype polioviruses. In
particular, a degenerate, inosine-containing, panpoliovirus (panPV) PCR primer
set is used to distinguish polioviruses from NPEVs. The high degree of nucleotide
sequence diversity among polioviruses presents a challenge to the systematic
design of nucleic acid-based reagents. To accommodate the wide variability and
rapid evolution of poliovirus genomes, degenerate codon positions on the template
were matched to mixed-base or deoxyinosine residues on both the primers and the
TaqManâ„¢ probes. Additional assays distinguish between Sabin vaccine strains and
non-Sabin strains. This chapter also describes the use of generic poliovirus
specific primers, along with degenerate and inosine-containing primers, for
routine VP1 sequencing of poliovirus isolates. These primers, along with
nondegenerate serotype-specific Sabin primers, can also be used to sequence
individual polioviruses in mixtures.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-3292-4_9 
PMID: 26983735  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
