

18. Clin Infect Dis. 2016 Jan 15;62(2):190-198. doi: 10.1093/cid/civ831. Epub 2015
Sep 28.

Genomic Surveillance Elucidates Persistent Wild Poliovirus Transmission During
2013-2015 in Major Reservoir Areas of Pakistan.

Alam MM(1), Sharif S(1), Shaukat S(1), Angez M(1), Khurshid A(1), Rehman L(1),
Zaidi SSZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, National Institute of Health, Chak Shahzad, Islamabad,
Pakistan.

Comment in
    Clin Infect Dis. 2016 Jan 15;62(2):199.

BACKGROUND: Despite tremendous efforts in the fight against polio, Pakistan bears
the highest proportion of poliomyelitis cases among the 3 endemic countries
including Afghanistan and Nigeria. Apart from insecurity and inaccessibility
challenges, the substantial shift of unimmunized children from North Waziristan
due to recent military operations was presumed to favor the widespread poliovirus
infection in Pakistan.
METHODS: To better understand the current epidemiological situation, we analyzed 
the virologic data of wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) strains detected in Pakistan 
during 2013-2015.
RESULTS: Five genetic clusters (A-E) were identified with at least 5% nucleotide 
divergence in the viral protein 1 (VP1) coding region. Peshawar, Quetta, and
Karachi were found to be the major endemic foci where multiple discrete genetic
lineages of WPV1 were detected. Phylogenetic analysis suggests that wild
poliovirus strains from endemic regions were genetically distant (with 5%-15% VP1
nucleotide divergence) from those detected in North Waziristan cases, excluding
the possibility of a recent progenitor of WPV1 instigating single-source
transmission across the country. Orphan lineages detected in Rawalpindi, Lahore, 
Hyderabad, Sukkur, and Jacobabad revealed silent transmission and the need for
vigilant surveillance. Sustenance of analogous genetic lineages over a period of 
3 years highlights multiple unimmunized foci present to maintain viral genetic
diversity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings are inconsistent with the hypothesis that impoverished 
populations from North Waziristan serve as a possible determinant of widespread
poliomyelitis infection in Pakistan and further emphasize the need to scale-up
clinical and environmental surveillance as well as immunization activities.

Â© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/civ831 
PMID: 26417032  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
