

19. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 28;10(8):e0135765. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135765.
eCollection 2015.

Has Wild Poliovirus Been Eliminated from Nigeria?

Famulare M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Disease Modeling, Bellevue, WA, United States of America.

Wild poliovirus type 3 (WPV3) has not been seen anywhere since the last case of
WPV3-associated paralysis in Nigeria in November 2012. At the time of writing,
the most recent case of wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) in Nigeria occurred in July
2014, and WPV1 has not been seen in Africa since a case in Somalia in August
2014. No cases associated with circulating vaccine-derived type 2 poliovirus
(cVDPV2) have been detected in Nigeria since November 2014. Has WPV1 been
eliminated from Africa? Has WPV3 been eradicated globally? Has Nigeria
interrupted cVDPV2 transmission? These questions are difficult because polio
surveillance is based on paralysis and paralysis only occurs in a small fraction 
of infections. This report provides estimates for the probabilities of poliovirus
elimination in Nigeria given available data as of March 31, 2015. It is based on 
a model of disease transmission that is built from historical polio incidence
rates and is designed to represent the uncertainties in transmission dynamics and
poliovirus detection that are fundamental to interpreting long time periods
without cases. The model estimates that, as of March 31, 2015, the probability of
WPV1 elimination in Nigeria is 84%, and that if WPV1 has not been eliminated, a
new case will be detected with 99% probability by the end of 2015. The
probability of WPV3 elimination (and thus global eradication) is > 99%. However, 
it is unlikely that the ongoing transmission of cVDPV2 has been interrupted; the 
probability of cVDPV2 elimination rises to 83% if no new cases are detected by
April 2016.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135765 
PMCID: PMC4552877
PMID: 26317401  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
