
Conflict of interest statement: All authors have completed and submitted the
ICMJE form for disclosure of potential conflicts of interest. No potential
conflicts of interest were disclosed.


2. PLoS Pathog. 2018 Sep 19;14(9):e1007304. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007304.
eCollection 2018 Sep.

Crystal structure of a soluble fragment of poliovirus 2CATPase.

Guan H(1), Tian J(1), Zhang C(1), Qin B(1), Cui S(1).

Author information: 
(1)MOH key Laboratory of Systems Biology of Pathogens, Institute of Pathogen
Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, China.

Poliovirus (PV) 2CATPase is the most studied 2C protein in the Picornaviridae
family. It is involved in RNA replication, encapsidation and uncoating and many
inhibitors have been found that target PV 2CATPase. Despite numerous
investigations to characterize its functions, a high-resolution structure of PV
2C has not yet been determined. We report here the crystal structure of a soluble
fragment of PV 2CATPase to 2.55Ã…, containing an ATPase domain, a zinc finger and 
a C-terminal helical domain but missing the N-terminal domain. The ATPase domain 
shares the common structural features with EV71 2C and other Superfamily 3
helicases. The C-terminal cysteine-rich motif folds into a CCCC type zinc finger 
in which four cysteine ligands and several auxiliary residues assist in zinc
binding. By comparing with the known zinc finger fold groups, we found the zinc
finger of 2C proteins belong to a new fold group, which we denote the
"Enterovirus 2C-like" group. The C-terminus of PV 2CATPase forms an amphipathic
helix that occupies a hydrophobic pocket located on an adjacent PV 2CATPase in
the crystal lattice. The C-terminus mediated PV 2C-2C interaction promotes
self-oligomerization, most likely hexamerization, which is fundamental to the
ATPase activity of 2C. The zinc finger is the most structurally diverse feature
in 2C proteins. Available structural and virological data suggest that the zinc
finger of 2C might confer the specificity of interaction with other proteins. We 
built a hexameric ring model of PV 2CATPase and visualized the previously
identified functional motifs and drug-resistant sites, thus providing a structure
framework for antiviral drug development.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007304 
PMCID: PMC6166989
PMID: 30231078  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
