

21. Virology. 2015 May;479-480:444-9. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2015.03.044. Epub 2015 Apr
15.

Escape of non-enveloped virus from intact cells.

Bird SW(1), Kirkegaard K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, United States.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, United States; Department of Genetics, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, United States. Electronic
address: karlak@stanford.edu.

How do viruses spread from cell to cell? Enveloped viruses acquire their
surrounding membranes by budding. If a newly enveloped virus has budded through
the plasma membrane, it finds itself outside the cell immediately. If it has
budded through the bounding membrane of an internal compartment such as the ER,
the virus finds itself in the lumen, from which it can exit the cell via the
conventional secretion pathway. Thus, although some enveloped viruses destroy the
cells they infect, there is no topological need to do so. On the other hand,
naked viruses such as poliovirus lack an external membrane. They are
protein-nucleic acid complexes within the cytoplasm or nucleus of the infected
cell, like a ribosome, a spliceosome or an aggregate of Huntingtin protein. The
simplest way for such a particle to pass through the single lipid bilayer that
separates it from the outside of the cell would be to violate the integrity of
that bilayer. Thus, it is not surprising that the primary mode of exit for
non-enveloped viruses is cell lysis. However, more complex exit strategies are
possible, such as the creation of new compartments whose complex topologies allow
the exit of cytoplasm and its contents without violating the integrity of the
cell. Here we will discuss the non-lytic spread of poliovirus and recent
observations of such compartments during viral infection with several different
picornaviruses.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2015.03.044 
PMCID: PMC4440412
PMID: 25890822  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
