
Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


3. Jpn J Infect Dis. 2018 Nov 22;71(6):442-447. doi: 10.7883/yoken.JJID.2017.338.
Epub 2018 Jul 31.

Poliovirus Detection and Genetic Characteristic from Sewage in Heilongjiang
Province from 2013 to 2016.

Ma Y(1), Wang X(1), Zhou X(1), Lv P(1), Wang H(1), Song J(1), Song C(1), Sun
Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Planned Immunity, Heilongjiang Center for Disease Control and
Prevention.

By monitoring the sewage system in Heilongjiang province from 2013 to 2016, this 
study aimed to analyze the epidemiological tendency and genetic mutation of
poliovirus (PV) found in the environment in order to setup a warning system for
vaccine-derived poliovirus (VDPV) and the spread of wild poliovirus. In this
study, we collected 139 sewage samples from 8 regions in Heilongjiang province.
Poliovirus was identified from 72 samples, and the positivity rate was 51%. A
total of 263 PV strains were isolated, including 22 strains of type 1 PV, 104
strains of type 2 PV, and 137 strains of type 3 PV. As a result of intratypic
differentiation, using real-time PCR and nucleotide sequencing, 3 type 1
pre-VDPV, one type 2 VDPV, and 2 type 3 pre-VDPV strains were isolated.
Interestingly, one type 1 strain with 5 nucleotide deletions and one type 3
recombinant on VP1 were isolated. By continuously monitoring the poliovirus in
the environment, we aimed to recognize the VDPV or wild poliovirus with high
neurovirulence from large-scale circulation and set up a warning system to avoid 
morbidity and virus transmission.

DOI: 10.7883/yoken.JJID.2017.338 
PMID: 30068885  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
