

31. J Med Microbiol. 2014 Dec;63(Pt 12):1724-31. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.081992-0. Epub
2014 Sep 26.

Bioinformatics analysis and genetic diversity of the poliovirus.

Liu Y(1), Ma T(1), Liu J(2), Zhao X(1), Cheng Z(1), Guo H(1), Wang S(1), Xu R(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Research Center for Animal Disease Control
Engineering Shandong Province, Shandong Agricultural University, Tai'an 271018,
PR China.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Research Center for Animal Disease Control
Engineering Shandong Province, Shandong Agricultural University, Tai'an 271018,
PR China Liujz@sdau.edu.cn vetliujz@163.com.

Poliomyelitis, a disease which can manifest as muscle paralysis, is caused by the
poliovirus, which is a human enterovirus and member of the family Picornaviridae 
that usually transmits by the faecal-oral route. The viruses of the OPV (oral
poliovirus attenuated-live vaccine) strains can mutate in the human intestine
during replication and some of these mutations can lead to the recovery of
serious neurovirulence. Informatics research of the poliovirus genome can be used
to explain further the characteristics of this virus. In this study, sequences
from 100 poliovirus isolates were acquired from GenBank. To determine the
evolutionary relationship between the strains, we compared and analysed the
sequences of the complete poliovirus genome and the VP1 region. The reconstructed
phylogenetic trees for the complete sequences and the VP1 sequences were both
divided into two branches, indicating that the genetic relationships of the whole
poliovirus genome and the VP1 sequences are very similar. This branching
indicates that the virulence and pathogenicity of poliomyelitis may be associated
with the VP1 region. Sequence alignment of the VP1 region revealed numerous
mutation sites in which mutation rates of >30 % were detected. In a group of
strains recorded in the USA, mutation sites and mutation types were the same and 
this may be associated with their distribution in the evolutionary tree and their
genetic relationship. In conclusion, the genetic evolutionary relationships of
poliovirus isolate sequences are determined to a great extent by the VP1 protein,
and poliovirus strains located on the same branch of the phylogenetic tree
contain the same mutation spots and mutation types. Hence, the genetic
characteristics of the VP1 region in the poliovirus genome should be analysed to 
identify the transmission route of poliovirus and provide the basis of viral
immunity development.

© 2014 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.081992-0 
PMID: 25261065  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
