

32. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 17;9(9):e107697. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107697.
eCollection 2014.

Molecular characterization and phylogenetic relationship of wild type 1
poliovirus strains circulating across Pakistan and Afghanistan bordering areas
during 2010-2012.

Shaukat S(1), Angez M(1), Alam MM(1), Sharif S(1), Khurshid A(1), Malik F(1),
Rehman L(1), Zaidi SS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, National Institute of Health, Chak Shahzad, Islamabad,
Pakistan.

Pakistan and Afghanistan share a long uncontrolled border with extensive
population movement on both sides. Wild poliovirus transmission has never been
interrupted in this block due to war against terrorism, poor public health
infrastructure, misconceptions about polio vaccines and inadequate immunization
activities. All these issues complicate the eradication operations and reinforce 
the complexity of wiping out poliomyelitis from this region. This study
illustrates the origins and routes of cross-border wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) 
transmission during 2010-2012 between Pakistan and Afghanistan. Sequence analyses
were conducted based on complete VP1 capsid protein sequences for WPV1 study
strains to determine the origin of poliovirus genetic lineages and their
evolutionary relationships. Phylogenetic tree was constructed from VP1 gene
sequences applying Maximum Likelihood method using Kimura 2- parameter model in
MEGA program v 5.0. A total of 72 (14.3%) out of 502 wild-type 1 polioviruses
were found circulating in border areas of both countries during 2010-2012.
Molecular phylogenetic analysis classified these strains in to two sub-genotypes 
with four clusters and 18 lineages. Genetic data confirmed that the most of WPV1 
lineages (12; 66.6%) were transmitted from Pakistan to Afghanistan. However, the 
genetic diversity was significantly reduced during 2012 as most of the lineages
were completely eliminated. In conclusion, Pakistan-Afghanistan block has emerged
as a single poliovirus reservoir sharing the multiple poliovirus lineages due to 
uncontrolled movement of people across the borders between two countries. If it
is neglected, it can jeopardize the extensive global efforts done so-far to
eradicate the poliovirus infection. Our data will be helpful to devise the
preventive strategies for effective control of wild poliovirus transmission in
this region.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107697 
PMCID: PMC4168008
PMID: 25229826  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
