

33. J Virol. 2014 Oct;88(20):11955-64. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01809-14. Epub 2014 Aug 6.

Effect of formaldehyde inactivation on poliovirus.

Wilton T(1), Dunn G(2), Eastwood D(3), Minor PD(2), Martin J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, National Institute for Biological Standards and Control,
Potters Bar, Hertfordshire, United Kingdom thomas.wilton@nibsc.org.
(2)Division of Virology, National Institute for Biological Standards and Control,
Potters Bar, Hertfordshire, United Kingdom.
(3)Division of Biotherapeutics, National Institute for Biological Standards and
Control, Potters Bar, Hertfordshire, United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    J Virol. 2014 Dec;88(23):13928.

Inactivated polio vaccines, which have been used in many countries for more than 
50 years, are produced by treating live poliovirus (PV) with formaldehyde.
However, the molecular mechanisms underlying virus inactivation are not well
understood. Infection by PV is initiated by virus binding to specific cell
receptors, which results in viral particles undergoing sequential conformational 
changes that generate altered structural forms (135S and 80S particles) and leads
to virus cell entry. We have analyzed the ability of inactivated PV to bind to
the human poliovirus receptor (hPVR) using various techniques such as
ultracentrifugation, fluorescence-activated cell sorting flow cytometry and
real-time reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR). The results showed that although
retaining the ability to bind to hPVR, inactivated PV bound less efficiently in
comparison to live PV. We also found that inactivated PV showed resistance to
structural conversion in vitro, as judged by measuring changes in antigenicity,
the ability to bind to hPVR, and viral RNA release at high temperature.
Furthermore, viral RNA from inactivated PV was shown to be modified, since cDNA
yields obtained by RT-PCR amplification were severely reduced and no infectious
virus was recovered after RNA transfection into susceptible cells. Importance:
This study represents a novel insight into the molecular mechanisms responsible
for poliovirus inactivation. We show that inactivation with formaldehyde has an
effect on early steps of viral replication as it reduces the ability of PV to
bind to hPVR, decreases the sensitivity of PV to convert to 135S particles, and
abolishes the infectivity of its viral RNA. These changes are likely responsible 
for the loss of infectivity shown by PV following inactivation. Techniques used
in this study represent new approaches for the characterization of inactivated PV
products and could be useful in developing improved methods for the production
and quality control testing of inactivated polio vaccines. Measuring the
antigenicity, capsid stability, and RNA integrity of inactivated PV samples could
help establishing the optimal balance between the loss of infectivity and the
preservation of virus antigenicity during inactivation.

Copyright Â© 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01809-14 
PMCID: PMC4178759
PMID: 25100844  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
