

39. Risk Anal. 2013 Apr;33(4):703-49. doi: 10.1111/risa.12044. Epub 2013 Mar 22.

Characterizing poliovirus transmission and evolution: insights from modeling
experiences with wild and vaccine-related polioviruses.

Duintjer Tebbens RJ(1), Pallansch MA, Kalkowska DA, Wassilak SG, Cochi SL,
Thompson KM.

Author information: 
(1)Kid Risk, Inc., 10524 Moss Park Rd., Ste. 204-364, Orlando, FL 32832, USA.
rdt@kidrisk.org

With national and global health policymakers facing numerous complex decisions
related to achieving and maintaining polio eradication, we expanded our
previously developed dynamic poliovirus transmission model using information from
an expert literature review process and including additional immunity states and 
the evolution of oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV). The model explicitly considers
serotype differences and distinguishes fecal-oral and oropharyngeal transmission.
We evaluated the model by simulating diverse historical experiences with
polioviruses, including one country that eliminated wild poliovirus using both
OPV and inactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV) (USA), three importation outbreaks
of wild poliovirus (Albania, the Netherlands, Tajikistan), one situation in which
no circulating vaccine-derived polioviruses (cVDPVs) emerge despite annual OPV
use and cessation (Cuba), three cVDPV outbreaks (Haiti, Madura Island in
Indonesia, northern Nigeria), one area of current endemic circulation of all
three serotypes (northern Nigeria), and one area with recent endemic circulation 
and subsequent elimination of multiple serotypes (northern India). We find that
when sufficient information about the conditions exists, the model can reproduce 
the general behavior of poliovirus transmission and outbreaks while maintaining
consistency in the generic model inputs. The assumption of spatially homogeneous 
mixing remains a significant limitation that affects the performance of the
differential equation-based model when significant heterogeneities in immunity
and mixing may exist. Further studies on OPV virus evolution and improved
understanding of the mechanisms of mixing and transmission may help to better
characterize poliovirus transmission in populations. Broad application of the
model promises to offer insights in the context of global and national policy and
economic models.

Â© 2013 Society for Risk Analysis.

DOI: 10.1111/risa.12044 
PMID: 23521018  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
