

40. Antiviral Res. 2013 May;98(2):186-91. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2013.03.003. Epub 
2013 Mar 13.

Anti-poliovirus activity of protease inhibitor AG-7404, and assessment of in
vitro activity in combination with antiviral capsid inhibitor compounds.

Rhoden E(1), Liu HM, Wang-Chern SW, Oberste MS.

Author information: 
(1)Polio and Picornavirus Laboratory Branch, Division of Viral Diseases, Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA. erhoden@cdc.gov

Erratum in
    Antiviral Res. 2013 Sep;99(3):436.

The National Research Council has recommended that at least one, preferably two, 
polio antiviral drugs be developed as a supplement to the tools currently
available for control of polio outbreaks post-eradication. The primary
application of such drugs is expected to be the resolution of chronic poliovirus 
excretion in persons with primary immunodeficiency disorders. We have assessed
the in vitro activity of AG-7404 (also known as "compound 1"), an inhibitor of
picornaviral 3C protease, against a large panel of programmatically important
poliovirus strains and its activity in combination with two poliovirus capsid
inhibitors, V-073 and BTA798. AG-7404 was active against all viruses in this
panel, with EC50 values ranging from 0.080 to 0.674 μM. Similarly, BTA798 was
active against all viruses in this panel, with EC50 values ranging from 0.003 to 
0.591μM. By comparison, values for V-073 were 0.003-0.126 μM. BTA798 was active
against V-073-resistant variants with an alanine to valine change in VP3 at
position 24. However, BTA798 was inactive against the V-073-resistant strains
with amino acid substitutions at VP1 amino acids 194 (equivalent to 192 in type
3) and 236. As expected from its different mechanism of action, AG-7404 was fully
active against all V-073-resistant variants, with EC₅₀ values ranging from 0.218 
to 0.819 μM, compared to values of 0.202-0.407 μM for the V-073-susceptible
parental strains. In vitro drug combination experiments demonstrated synergy
between AG-7404 and either V-073 or BTA798, whereas the combination of the two
capsid inhibitors acted additively.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2013.03.003 
PMID: 23499651  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
