

43. Rev Med Virol. 2010 Nov;20(6):358-71. doi: 10.1002/rmv.663.

Mechanisms of genetic variation in polioviruses.

Savolainen-Kopra C(1), Blomqvist S.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Health and Welfare (THL), Department of Infectious
Disease Surveillance and Control, Unit of Intestinal Viruses, Helsinki, Finland. 
carita.savolainen-kopra@thl.fi

Polioviruses, as with all RNA viruses, are in a constant process of evolution
driven by different mechanisms. With multiple mechanisms for genetic variability,
they are successful conformists, adapting to changes in their habitat. The
evolution of polioviruses may occur with generation of point mutations followed
by genetic drift and selection. The mutation rate of polioviruses based on
several studies is approximately 3 × 10(-2) mutations/synonymous site/year in the
gene encoding viral protein 1. Genetic variation in polioviruses may also be
increased by sharing of genetic data of two different poliovirus lineages by
means of homologous recombination. According to the current view, recombination
is considered usually to occur by strand-switching, but a non-replicative model
has also been described. In recombination, polioviruses may either gain a set of 
advantageous mutations selected and fixed in previous generations of the parental
viruses or get rid of deleterious ones. The prerequisites and constraints of the 
evolution mechanisms will be discussed. Furthermore, consequences of poliovirus
evolution will be reviewed in the light of observations made on currently
circulating polioviruses. We will also describe how polioviruses strike back: as 
wild type polioviruses approach eradication, vaccine derived strains increase
their occurrence and genetic variability.

2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/rmv.663 
PMID: 20949639  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
