

5. Food Environ Virol. 2017 Dec;9(4):361-382. doi: 10.1007/s12560-017-9314-4. Epub
2017 Jul 7.

Insights from a Systematic Search for Information on Designs, Costs, and
Effectiveness of Poliovirus Environmental Surveillance Systems.

Duintjer Tebbens RJ(1), Zimmermann M(2), Pallansch MA(3), Thompson KM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Kid Risk, Inc, 10524 Moss Park Rd., Ste. 204-364, Orlando, FL, 32832, USA.
rdt@kidrisk.org.
(2)Kid Risk, Inc, 10524 Moss Park Rd., Ste. 204-364, Orlando, FL, 32832, USA.
(3)Division of Viral Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Atlanta, GA, 30333, USA.

Poliovirus surveillance plays a critical role in achieving and certifying
eradication and will play a key role in the polio endgame. Environmental
surveillance can provide an opportunity to detect circulating polioviruses prior 
to the observation of any acute flaccid paralysis cases. We completed a
systematic review of peer-reviewed publications on environmental surveillance for
polio including the search terms "environmental surveillance" or "sewage," and
"polio," "poliovirus," or "poliomyelitis," and compared characteristics of the
resulting studies. The review included 146 studies representing 101 environmental
surveillance activities from 48 countries published between 1975 and 2016.
Studies reported taking samples from sewage treatment facilities, surface waters,
and various other environmental sources, although they generally did not present 
sufficient details to thoroughly evaluate the sewage systems and catchment areas.
When reported, catchment areas varied from 50 to over 7.3 million people (median 
of 500,000 for the 25% of activities that reported catchment areas, notably with 
60% of the studies not reporting this information and 16% reporting insufficient 
information to estimate the catchment area population size). While numerous
studies reported the ability of environmental surveillance to detect polioviruses
in the absence of clinical cases, the review revealed very limited information
about the costs and limited information to support quantitative population
effectiveness of conducting environmental surveillance. This review motivates
future studies to better characterize poliovirus environmental surveillance
systems and the potential value of information that they may provide in the polio
endgame.

DOI: 10.1007/s12560-017-9314-4 
PMID: 28687986  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
