
1. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2018 Oct 26;67(42):1189-1194. doi:
10.15585/mmwr.mm6742a5.

Update on Vaccine-Derived Polioviruses - Worldwide, January 2017-June 2018.

Jorba J, Diop OM, Iber J, Henderson E, Zhao K, Sutter RW, Wassilak SGF, Burns CC.

Since the Global Polio Eradication Initiative was launched in 1988 (1), the
number of polio cases worldwide has declined by >99.99%. Among the three wild
poliovirus (WPV) serotypes, only type 1 (WPV1) has been detected since 2012. This
decline is attributable primarily to use of the live, attenuated oral poliovirus 
vaccine (OPV) in national routine immunization schedules and mass vaccination
campaigns. The success and safety record of OPV use is offset by the rare
emergence of genetically divergent vaccine-derived polioviruses (VDPVs), whose
genetic drift from the parental OPV strains indicates prolonged replication or
circulation (2). Circulating VDPVs (cVDPVs) can emerge in areas with low
immunization coverage and can cause outbreaks of paralytic polio. In addition,
immunodeficiency-associated VDPVs (iVDPVs) can emerge in persons with primary
immunodeficiencies and can replicate and be excreted for years. This report
presents data on VDPVs detected during January 2017-June 2018 and updates
previous VDPV summaries (3). During this reporting period, new cVDPV outbreaks
were detected in five countries. Fourteen newly identified persons in nine
countries were found to excrete iVDPVs. Ambiguous VDPVs (aVDPVs), isolates that
cannot be classified definitively, were found among immunocompetent persons and
environmental samples in seven countries.

DOI: 10.15585/mmwr.mm6742a5 
PMCID: PMC6290814
PMID: 30359342  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have completed and submitted the
ICMJE form for disclosure of potential conflicts of interest. No potential
conflicts of interest were disclosed.


2. PLoS Pathog. 2018 Sep 19;14(9):e1007304. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007304.
eCollection 2018 Sep.

Crystal structure of a soluble fragment of poliovirus 2CATPase.

Guan H(1), Tian J(1), Zhang C(1), Qin B(1), Cui S(1).

Author information: 
(1)MOH key Laboratory of Systems Biology of Pathogens, Institute of Pathogen
Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, China.

Poliovirus (PV) 2CATPase is the most studied 2C protein in the Picornaviridae
family. It is involved in RNA replication, encapsidation and uncoating and many
inhibitors have been found that target PV 2CATPase. Despite numerous
investigations to characterize its functions, a high-resolution structure of PV
2C has not yet been determined. We report here the crystal structure of a soluble
fragment of PV 2CATPase to 2.55Å, containing an ATPase domain, a zinc finger and 
a C-terminal helical domain but missing the N-terminal domain. The ATPase domain 
shares the common structural features with EV71 2C and other Superfamily 3
helicases. The C-terminal cysteine-rich motif folds into a CCCC type zinc finger 
in which four cysteine ligands and several auxiliary residues assist in zinc
binding. By comparing with the known zinc finger fold groups, we found the zinc
finger of 2C proteins belong to a new fold group, which we denote the
"Enterovirus 2C-like" group. The C-terminus of PV 2CATPase forms an amphipathic
helix that occupies a hydrophobic pocket located on an adjacent PV 2CATPase in
the crystal lattice. The C-terminus mediated PV 2C-2C interaction promotes
self-oligomerization, most likely hexamerization, which is fundamental to the
ATPase activity of 2C. The zinc finger is the most structurally diverse feature
in 2C proteins. Available structural and virological data suggest that the zinc
finger of 2C might confer the specificity of interaction with other proteins. We 
built a hexameric ring model of PV 2CATPase and visualized the previously
identified functional motifs and drug-resistant sites, thus providing a structure
framework for antiviral drug development.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007304 
PMCID: PMC6166989
PMID: 30231078  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


3. Jpn J Infect Dis. 2018 Nov 22;71(6):442-447. doi: 10.7883/yoken.JJID.2017.338.
Epub 2018 Jul 31.

Poliovirus Detection and Genetic Characteristic from Sewage in Heilongjiang
Province from 2013 to 2016.

Ma Y(1), Wang X(1), Zhou X(1), Lv P(1), Wang H(1), Song J(1), Song C(1), Sun
Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Planned Immunity, Heilongjiang Center for Disease Control and
Prevention.

By monitoring the sewage system in Heilongjiang province from 2013 to 2016, this 
study aimed to analyze the epidemiological tendency and genetic mutation of
poliovirus (PV) found in the environment in order to setup a warning system for
vaccine-derived poliovirus (VDPV) and the spread of wild poliovirus. In this
study, we collected 139 sewage samples from 8 regions in Heilongjiang province.
Poliovirus was identified from 72 samples, and the positivity rate was 51%. A
total of 263 PV strains were isolated, including 22 strains of type 1 PV, 104
strains of type 2 PV, and 137 strains of type 3 PV. As a result of intratypic
differentiation, using real-time PCR and nucleotide sequencing, 3 type 1
pre-VDPV, one type 2 VDPV, and 2 type 3 pre-VDPV strains were isolated.
Interestingly, one type 1 strain with 5 nucleotide deletions and one type 3
recombinant on VP1 were isolated. By continuously monitoring the poliovirus in
the environment, we aimed to recognize the VDPV or wild poliovirus with high
neurovirulence from large-scale circulation and set up a warning system to avoid 
morbidity and virus transmission.

DOI: 10.7883/yoken.JJID.2017.338 
PMID: 30068885  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Med Virol. 2017 Dec;89(12):2075-2083. doi: 10.1002/jmv.24909. Epub 2017 Aug 29.

A safe and reliable neutralization assay based on pseudovirus to measure
neutralizing antibody titer against poliovirus.

Liu S(1), Song D(1), Bai H(1), Lu W(1), Dai X(1), Hao C(1), Zhang Z(1), Guo H(1),
Zhang Y(1), Li X(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Vaccine and Serum Institute, Beijing, China.

With the promotion of inactivated poliomyelitis vaccine (IPV) and live attenuated
oral poliomyelitis vaccine (OPV), the global reported cases of poliomyelitis have
reduced sharply from 0.35 million in 1988 to 74 in 2015. The Polio Eradication & 
Endgame Strategic Plan published by WHO in 2013 included the strategy of
implementation of poliovirus safe handling and containment measures to minimize
the risks of facility-associated reintroduction of virus into the polio-free
community to prevent the re-import of poliovirus. Toward this strategy, we
produced replication-incompetent pseudovirus of poliovirus type 1, 2, 3
attenuated strains by constructing poliovirus capsid expression vectors and
poliovirus replicon then transfecting HEK293T cells and developed a
pseudovirus-based neutralization assay (pNA) to determine neutralizing antibody
titer which is more secure, time-saving and reliable than conventional
neutralization assay (cNA). By using anti-poliovirus rat serum, we demonstrated
excellent correlation between neutralizing antibody titers measured by cNA and
pNA. It was concluded that pNA can be a potential alternative to replace cNA as a
safe and time-saving system for titer determination after live poliovirus's
safekeeping.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.24909 
PMID: 28786502  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Food Environ Virol. 2017 Dec;9(4):361-382. doi: 10.1007/s12560-017-9314-4. Epub
2017 Jul 7.

Insights from a Systematic Search for Information on Designs, Costs, and
Effectiveness of Poliovirus Environmental Surveillance Systems.

Duintjer Tebbens RJ(1), Zimmermann M(2), Pallansch MA(3), Thompson KM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Kid Risk, Inc, 10524 Moss Park Rd., Ste. 204-364, Orlando, FL, 32832, USA.
rdt@kidrisk.org.
(2)Kid Risk, Inc, 10524 Moss Park Rd., Ste. 204-364, Orlando, FL, 32832, USA.
(3)Division of Viral Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Atlanta, GA, 30333, USA.

Poliovirus surveillance plays a critical role in achieving and certifying
eradication and will play a key role in the polio endgame. Environmental
surveillance can provide an opportunity to detect circulating polioviruses prior 
to the observation of any acute flaccid paralysis cases. We completed a
systematic review of peer-reviewed publications on environmental surveillance for
polio including the search terms "environmental surveillance" or "sewage," and
"polio," "poliovirus," or "poliomyelitis," and compared characteristics of the
resulting studies. The review included 146 studies representing 101 environmental
surveillance activities from 48 countries published between 1975 and 2016.
Studies reported taking samples from sewage treatment facilities, surface waters,
and various other environmental sources, although they generally did not present 
sufficient details to thoroughly evaluate the sewage systems and catchment areas.
When reported, catchment areas varied from 50 to over 7.3 million people (median 
of 500,000 for the 25% of activities that reported catchment areas, notably with 
60% of the studies not reporting this information and 16% reporting insufficient 
information to estimate the catchment area population size). While numerous
studies reported the ability of environmental surveillance to detect polioviruses
in the absence of clinical cases, the review revealed very limited information
about the costs and limited information to support quantitative population
effectiveness of conducting environmental surveillance. This review motivates
future studies to better characterize poliovirus environmental surveillance
systems and the potential value of information that they may provide in the polio
endgame.

DOI: 10.1007/s12560-017-9314-4 
PMID: 28687986  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Virus Res. 2017 Jun 15;238:179-182. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2017.06.017. Epub
2017 Jun 30.

Isolation and characterization of a highly evolved type 3 vaccine-derived
poliovirus in China.

Zhang X(1), Qin C(1), Li W(1), Zheng Z(2), Wang H(2), Cui Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Wuhan 430071, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Wuhan 430071, China; Key Laboratory of Special Pathogens and
Biosafety, Center for Emerging Infectious Diseases, Wuhan Institute of Virology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430071, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Wuhan 430071, China. Electronic address: czq@wh.iov.cn.

In this study, we report the identification and characterization of a highly
evolved type 3 vaccine-derived poliovirus (VDPV) strain designated as WIV14,
isolated in 2014 from a 4-year-old child suspected of having an enteroviral
infection in China. Complete genome sequence of WIV14 revealed multiple
nucleotide substitutions when compared with the attenuated poliovirus (PV) Sabin 
3, including the reversion of three major attenuation sites to wild type. From
the nucleotide divergence for the P1/capsid region, we estimated that the
evolution time of WIV14 was more than 7 years, indicating the possible long time 
of replication. WIV14 strain seemed to have differences in biological
characteristics compared with attenuated PV strains, such as being
non-temperature-sensitive and producing large plaques. The current isolation of a
highly divergent type 3 VDPV gives an idea of the risk of emergent VDPV strains, 
and emphasizes the importance of maintaining high vaccination coverage and herd
immunity against PVs in China.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2017.06.017 
PMID: 28669764  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Biologicals. 2017 Jul;48:92-100. doi: 10.1016/j.biologicals.2017.05.001. Epub
2017 May 23.

Scientific consultation on the safety and containment of new poliovirus strains
for vaccine production, clinical/regulatory testing and research. Report of a
meeting held at NIBSC, Potters Bar, Hertfordshire, UK, 6/7th July 2016.

Minor PD(1), Lane B(2), Mimms S(2), Bar P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Head, Division of Virology, Hertfordshire, EN6 3QG, United Kingdom. Electronic
address: Philip.Minor@nibsc.org.
(2)National Institute of Biological Standardisation and Control /MHRA,
Hertfordshire, EN6 3QG, United Kingdom.

When poliomyelitis is totally eradicated from the natural world containment will 
be vital to prevent its re-emergence. The matter has become pressing as type 2
component of oral polio vaccine was completely withdrawn by May 2016 as wild ty[e
2 was declared eradicated. Work on polioviruses must be contained in accordance
with GAPIII (the third version of the Global Action Plan of WHO). Some activities
will be essential for years after eradication. Vaccine production and control,
surveillance and supportive applied and academic research must all continue. Most
laboratories do not currently comply with GAPIII and could not do so in the short
term without disruption of essential activities including vaccine supply. The
development and use of safer strains is raised in GAPIII and the meeting
considered the strains available and the uses to which they could be put to
facilitate compliance with the aims of GAPIII.

Crown Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biologicals.2017.05.001 
PMID: 28549939  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Clin Microbiol. 2017 Jul;55(7):2162-2171. doi: 10.1128/JCM.00144-17. Epub 2017 
May 3.

Detection of Emerging Vaccine-Related Polioviruses by Deep Sequencing.

Sahoo MK(1), Holubar M(2), Huang C(3), Mohamed-Hadley A(1), Liu Y(1), Waggoner
JJ(2), Troy SB(4), Garcia-Garcia L(5), Ferreyra-Reyes L(5), Maldonado Y(3),
Pinsky BA(6)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases and Geographic
Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Infectious Diseases, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA.
(4)Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, Virginia, USA.
(5)Instituto Nacional de Salud Pública, Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico.
(6)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California, USA bpinsky@stanford.edu.

Oral poliovirus vaccine can mutate to regain neurovirulence. To date, evaluation 
of these mutations has been performed primarily on culture-enriched isolates by
using conventional Sanger sequencing. We therefore developed a
culture-independent, deep-sequencing method targeting the 5' untranslated region 
(UTR) and P1 genomic region to characterize vaccine-related poliovirus variants. 
Error analysis of the deep-sequencing method demonstrated reliable detection of
poliovirus mutations at levels of <1%, depending on read depth. Sequencing of
viral nucleic acids from the stool of vaccinated, asymptomatic children and their
close contacts collected during a prospective cohort study in Veracruz, Mexico,
revealed no vaccine-derived polioviruses. This was expected given that the
longest duration between sequenced sample collection and the end of the most
recent national immunization week was 66 days. However, we identified many
low-level variants (<5%) distributed across the 5' UTR and P1 genomic region in
all three Sabin serotypes, as well as vaccine-related viruses with multiple
canonical mutations associated with phenotypic reversion present at high levels
(>90%). These results suggest that monitoring emerging vaccine-related poliovirus
variants by deep sequencing may aid in the poliovirus endgame and efforts to
ensure global polio eradication.

Copyright © 2017 Sahoo et al.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.00144-17 
PMCID: PMC5483918
PMID: 28468861  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Virol Methods. 2017 Aug;246:75-80. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2017.04.016. Epub
2017 Apr 26.

Quantifying low-frequency revertants in oral poliovirus vaccine using next
generation sequencing.

Sarcey E(1), Serres A(2), Tindy F(3), Chareyre A(4), Ng S(5), Nicolas M(6),
Vetter E(7), Bonnevay T(8), Abachin E(9), Mallet L(10).

Author information: 
(1)Sanofi Pasteur, Analytical Research and Development Department EU, Campus
Mérieux-1541, Avenue Marcel Mérieux, 69280, Marcy L'Etoile, France. Electronic
address: Eric.Sarcey@sanofi.com.
(2)Sanofi Pasteur, Analytical Research and Development Department EU, Campus
Mérieux-1541, Avenue Marcel Mérieux, 69280, Marcy L'Etoile, France. Electronic
address: Aurelie.Serres@sanofi.com.
(3)Sanofi Pasteur, Analytical Research and Development Department EU, Campus
Mérieux-1541, Avenue Marcel Mérieux, 69280, Marcy L'Etoile, France. Electronic
address: Fabrice.Tindy@sanofi.com.
(4)Sanofi Pasteur, Analytical Research and Development Department EU, Campus
Mérieux-1541, Avenue Marcel Mérieux, 69280, Marcy L'Etoile, France. Electronic
address: Audrey.Chareyre@sanofi.com.
(5)Sanofi Pasteur, Microbiology & Virology Platform, Department of Analytical
Research & Development North America, 1755 Steeles Avenue West, Toronto, Ontario 
M2R 3T4, Canada. Electronic address: Siemon.Ng@sanofi.com.
(6)Sanofi Pasteur, Analytical Research and Development Department EU, Campus
Mérieux-1541, Avenue Marcel Mérieux, 69280, Marcy L'Etoile, France. Electronic
address: Marine.Nicolas@sanofi.com.
(7)Sanofi Pasteur, Analytical Research and Development Department EU, Campus
Mérieux-1541, Avenue Marcel Mérieux, 69280, Marcy L'Etoile, France. Electronic
address: Emmanuelle.Vetter@sanofi.com.
(8)Sanofi Pasteur, Analytical Research and Development Department EU, Campus
Mérieux-1541, Avenue Marcel Mérieux, 69280, Marcy L'Etoile, France. Electronic
address: Thierry.Bonnevay@sanofi.com.
(9)Sanofi Pasteur, Analytical Research and Development Department EU, Campus
Mérieux-1541, Avenue Marcel Mérieux, 69280, Marcy L'Etoile, France. Electronic
address: Eric.Abachin@sanofi.com.
(10)Sanofi Pasteur, Analytical Research and Development Department EU, Campus
Mérieux-1541, Avenue Marcel Mérieux, 69280, Marcy L'Etoile, France. Electronic
address: Laurent.Mallet@sanofi.com.

Spontaneous reversion to neurovirulence of live attenuated oral poliovirus
vaccine (OPV) serotype 3 (chiefly involving the n.472U>C mutation), must be
monitored during production to ensure vaccine safety and consistency. Mutant
analysis by polymerase chain reaction and restriction enzyme cleavage (MAPREC)
has long been endorsed by the World Health Organization as the preferred in vitro
test for this purpose; however, it requires radiolabeling, which is no longer
supported by many laboratories. We evaluated the performance and suitability of
next generation sequencing (NGS) as an alternative to MAPREC. The linearity of
NGS was demonstrated at revertant concentrations equivalent to the study range of
0.25%-1.5%. NGS repeatability and intermediate precision were comparable across
all tested samples, and NGS was highly reproducible, irrespective of sequencing
platform or analysis software used. NGS was performed on OPV serotype 3 working
seed lots and monovalent bulks (n=21) that were previously tested using MAPREC,
and which covered the representative range of vaccine production. Percentages of 
472-C revertants identified by NGS and MAPREC were comparable and highly
correlated (r≥0.80), with a Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.95585
(p<0.0001). NGS demonstrated statistically equivalent performance to that of
MAPREC for quantifying low-frequency OPV serotype 3 revertants, and offers a
valid alternative to MAPREC.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2017.04.016 
PMID: 28456668  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. MBio. 2017 Mar 14;8(2). pii: e02020-16. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02020-16.

Plaques Formed by Mutagenized Viral Populations Have Elevated Coinfection
Frequencies.

Aguilera ER(1), Erickson AK(1), Jesudhasan PR(1), Robinson CM(1), Pfeiffer JK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas, USA Julie.Pfeiffer@UTSouthwestern.edu.

Comment in
    MBio. 2017 Aug 8;8(4):null.
    MBio. 2017 Aug 8;8(4):null.

The plaque assay is a common technique used to measure virus concentrations and
is based upon the principle that each plaque represents a single infectious unit.
As such, the number of plaques is expected to correlate linearly with the virus
dilution plated, and each plaque should be formed by a single founder virus.
Here, we examined whether more than one virus can contribute to plaque formation.
By using genetic and phenotypic assays with genetically marked polioviruses, we
found that multiple parental viruses are present in 5 to 7% of plaques, even at
an extremely low multiplicity of infection. We demonstrated through visual and
biophysical assays that, like many viral stocks, our viral stocks contain both
single particles and aggregates. These data suggest that aggregated virions are
capable of inducing coinfection and chimeric plaque formation. In fact, inducing 
virion aggregation via exposure to low pH increased coinfection in a flow
cytometry-based assay. We hypothesized that plaques generated by viruses with
high mutation loads may have higher coinfection frequencies due to processes
restoring fitness, such as complementation and recombination. Indeed, we found
that coinfection frequency correlated with mutation load, with 17% chimeric
plaque formation for heavily mutagenized viruses. Importantly, the frequency of
chimeric plaques may be underestimated by up to threefold, since coinfection with
the same parental virus cannot be scored in our assay. This work indicates that
more than one virus can contribute to plaque formation and that coinfection may
assist plaque formation in situations where the amount of genome damage is
high.IMPORTANCE One of the most common methods to quantify viruses is the plaque 
assay, where it is generally presumed that each plaque represents a single
infectious virus. Using genetically marked polioviruses, we demonstrate that a
plaque can contain more than one parental virus, likely due to aggregates within 
virus stocks that induce coinfection of a cell. A relatively small number of
plaques are the products of coinfection for our standard virus stocks. However,
mutagenized virus stocks with increased genome damage give rise to a higher
amount of plaques that are chimeric. These results suggest that coinfection may
aid plaque formation of viruses with genome damage, possibly due to processes
such as complementation and recombination. Overall, our results suggest that the 
relationship between viral dilution and plaque number may not be linear,
particularly for mutagenized viral populations.

Copyright © 2017 Aguilera et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02020-16 
PMCID: PMC5350468
PMID: 28292984  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Clin Microbiol. 2017 Feb;55(2):606-615. doi: 10.1128/JCM.02121-16. Epub 2016
Dec 7.

High-Throughput Next-Generation Sequencing of Polioviruses.

Montmayeur AM(1), Ng TF(2), Schmidt A(3), Zhao K(4), Magaña L(5), Iber J(4),
Castro CJ(5), Chen Q(4), Henderson E(4), Ramos E(1), Shaw J(4), Tatusov RL(1),
Dybdahl-Sissoko N(4), Endegue-Zanga MC(6), Adeniji JA(7), Oberste MS(4), Burns
CC(4).

Author information: 
(1)CSRA International, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(2)Division of Viral Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Atlanta, Georgia, USA ylz9@cdc.gov.
(3)IHRC, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(4)Division of Viral Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(5)Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education, Oak Ridge, Tennessee, USA.
(6)Centre Pasteur du Cameroon, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(7)Department of Virology, College of Medicine, University of Ibadan, Ibadan,
Nigeria.

The poliovirus (PV) is currently targeted for worldwide eradication and
containment. Sanger-based sequencing of the viral protein 1 (VP1) capsid region
is currently the standard method for PV surveillance. However, the whole-genome
sequence is sometimes needed for higher resolution global surveillance. In this
study, we optimized whole-genome sequencing protocols for poliovirus isolates and
FTA cards using next-generation sequencing (NGS), aiming for high sequence
coverage, efficiency, and throughput. We found that DNase treatment of poliovirus
RNA followed by random reverse transcription (RT), amplification, and the use of 
the Nextera XT DNA library preparation kit produced significantly better results 
than other preparations. The average viral reads per total reads, a measurement
of efficiency, was as high as 84.2% ± 15.6%. PV genomes covering >99 to 100% of
the reference length were obtained and validated with Sanger sequencing. A total 
of 52 PV genomes were generated, multiplexing as many as 64 samples in a single
Illumina MiSeq run. This high-throughput, sequence-independent NGS approach
facilitated the detection of a diverse range of PVs, especially for those in
vaccine-derived polioviruses (VDPV), circulating VDPV, or
immunodeficiency-related VDPV. In contrast to results from previous studies on
other viruses, our results showed that filtration and nuclease treatment did not 
discernibly increase the sequencing efficiency of PV isolates. However, DNase
treatment after nucleic acid extraction to remove host DNA significantly improved
the sequencing results. This NGS method has been successfully implemented to
generate PV genomes for molecular epidemiology of the most recent PV isolates.
Additionally, the ability to obtain full PV genomes from FTA cards will aid in
facilitating global poliovirus surveillance.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.02121-16 
PMCID: PMC5277531
PMID: 27927929  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Biologicals. 2016 Nov;44(6):581-587. doi: 10.1016/j.biologicals.2016.08.005. Epub
2016 Oct 5.

Development of inactivated poliovirus vaccine from Sabin strains: A progress
report.

Okayasu H(1), Sein C(2), Hamidi A(3), Bakker WA(3), Sutter RW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research and Product Development Team, Polio Eradication Department, The World
Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland. Electronic address: okayasuh@who.int.
(2)Research and Product Development Team, Polio Eradication Department, The World
Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
(3)Institute for Translational Vaccinology, Intravacc, Bilthoven, The
Netherlands.

The Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI) has seen significant progress
since it began in 1988, largely due to the worldwide use of oral poliovirus
vaccine (OPV). In order to achieve polio eradication the global cessation of OPV 
is necessary because OPV contains live attenuated poliovirus, which in rare
circumstances could re-gain wild poliovirus (WPV) characteristics with potential 
to establish transmission. The GPEI endgame strategy for the period 2013-2018
recommends the globally synchronised sequential cessation of the Sabin strains
contained in the OPV, starting with type 2 Sabin. The withdrawal of Sabin type 2 
took place in April 2016, with the introduction of at least one dose of
inactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV) as a risk mitigation strategy. The
introduction of IPV into 126 countries since 2013 has required a rapid scale-up
of IPV production by the two manufacturers supplying the global public sector
market. This scale-up has been fraught with challenges, resulting in reductions
of 40-50% of initial supply commitments. Consequently, 22 countries will not be
supplied until 2018, and another 23 countries will experience serious stock-outs.
In the last decade repeated calls-for-action were made to the global community to
invigorate their vision and investment in developing "new poliovirus vaccines"
including the development of IPV from less-virulent strains, such as Sabin-IPV
(S-IPV). The conventional Salk-IPV production is limited to high-income
industrialized-country manufacturers due to the containment requirements (i.e.,
high sanitation, low force-of-poliovirus-infection, and high population
immunity). The use of Sabin strains in the production of S-IPV carries a lower
biosafety risk, and was determined to be suitable for production in developing
countries, expanding the manufacturing base and making IPV more affordable and
accessible in the long term. Significant progress in the S-IPV has been made
since 2006. S-IPV is now licensed as S-IPV in Japan and as standalone S-IPV in
China, demonstrating the feasibility of this vaccine. In addition, production
process improvements can further reduce the cost of production. The latter are
critical to the economic success of this vaccine in the global market. We
summarize the progress made to date in S-IPV technology, the scientific data and 
economic evidence in support of S-IPV development.

Copyright © 2016 International Alliance for Biological Standardization. Published
by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biologicals.2016.08.005 
PMID: 27720268  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Bing Du Xue Bao. 2016 Jul;32(4):459-64.

[Complete Genome Characterization of Vaccine-derived Polioviruses Isolated in
Yunnan,China].

[Article in Chinese]

Tang J, Zhang J, Li K, Tian B, Zhao Z, Ding Z.

To explore the genomic characterization of 4vaccine-derived
poliovirus(VDPV)strains isolated from 2acute flaccid paralysis(AFP)cases in
Yunnan Province in 2010 and 2012,respectively,the complete genome sequences of
the 4strains were determined. Sequence analysis revealed that the complete genome
length of the type Ⅱ and type Ⅰ VDPV was 7439nt and 7441 nt, respectively.
Nucleotide and amino acid sequence similarities of type II VDPV were 95.4% and
97.7%,respectively,and type I VDPV were93.9% and 97.9%,respectively as compared
with those of Sabin strains. Nucleotide substitutions were found at two important
attenuation sites (nt 481 and nt in type Ⅱ VDPV, and three important attenuation 
sites(nt480,nt2795 and nt6203)in type I VDPV. Type 2 and type 1VDPV strains had
1.0% and2.3% divergence with Sabin strains, respectively. Similarity plot
analysis showed multiple recombination events in the genome of the 4strains,which
showed that the recombination was common and complex. Analysis of the
characteristics of VDPVs on molecular level could provide valuable information on
evolutionary dynamics and lay foundation for developing scientific and feasible
strategy to control VDPV.


PMID: 29981280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Cell Host Microbe. 2016 Apr 13;19(4):493-503. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2016.03.009.

RNA Recombination Enhances Adaptability and Is Required for Virus Spread and
Virulence.

Xiao Y(1), Rouzine IM(2), Bianco S(3), Acevedo A(1), Goldstein EF(1), Farkov
M(4), Brodsky L(4), Andino R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA; Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, 
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.
(3)Department of Industrial and Applied Genomics, Accelerated Discovery Lab, IBM 
Almaden Research Center, 650 Harry Road, San Jose, CA 95120-6099, USA.
(4)Tauber Bioinformatics Research Center and Department of Evolutionary and
Environmental Biology, University of Haifa, Mount Carmel, Haifa 31905, Israel.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. Electronic address:
raul.andino@ucsf.edu.

Erratum in
    Cell Host Microbe. 2017 Sep 13;22(3):420.

Mutation and recombination are central processes driving microbial evolution. A
high mutation rate fuels adaptation but also generates deleterious mutations.
Recombination between two different genomes may resolve this paradox, alleviating
effects of clonal interference and purging deleterious mutations. Here we
demonstrate that recombination significantly accelerates adaptation and evolution
during acute virus infection. We identified a poliovirus recombination
determinant within the virus polymerase, mutation of which reduces recombination 
rates without altering replication fidelity. By generating a panel of variants
with distinct mutation rates and recombination ability, we demonstrate that
recombination is essential to enrich the population in beneficial mutations and
purge it from deleterious mutations. The concerted activities of mutation and
recombination are key to virus spread and virulence in infected animals. These
findings inform a mathematical model to demonstrate that poliovirus adapts most
rapidly at an optimal mutation rate determined by the trade-off between selection
and accumulation of detrimental mutations.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chom.2016.03.009 
PMCID: PMC4840895
PMID: 27078068  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Methods Mol Biol. 2016;1387:325-38. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-3292-4_17.

Identification and Analysis of Antiviral Compounds Against Poliovirus.

Leyssen P(1), Franco D(1), Tijsma A(1), Lacroix C(1), De Palma A(1), Neyts J(2).

Author information: 
(1)KU Leuven - University of Leuven, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Rega Institute for Medical Research, Laboratory of Virology and Chemotherapy,
Minderbroedersstraat 10, 3000, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)KU Leuven - University of Leuven, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Rega Institute for Medical Research, Laboratory of Virology and Chemotherapy,
Minderbroedersstraat 10, 3000, Leuven, Belgium. johan.neyts@rega.kuleuven.be.

The Global Polio Eradication Initiative, launched in 1988, had as its goal the
eradication of polio worldwide by the year 2000 through large-scale vaccinations 
campaigns with the live attenuated oral PV vaccine (OPV) (Griffiths et al.,
Biologicals 34:73-74, 2006). Despite substantial progress, polio remains endemic 
in several countries and new imported cases are reported on a regular basis (
http://www.polioeradication.org/casecount.asp ).It was recognized by the
poliovirus research community that developing antivirals against poliovirus would
be invaluable in the post-OPV era. Here, we describe three methods essential for 
the identification of selective inhibitors of poliovirus replication and for
determining their mode of action by time-of-drug-addition studies as well as by
the isolation of compound-resistant poliovirus variants.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-3292-4_17 
PMID: 26983743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Methods Mol Biol. 2016;1387:177-212. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-3292-4_9.

Molecular Properties of Poliovirus Isolates: Nucleotide Sequence Analysis, Typing
by PCR and Real-Time RT-PCR.

Burns CC(1), Kilpatrick DR(2), Iber JC(2), Chen Q(2), Kew OM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Polio and Picornavirus Laboratory Branch, Division of Viral Diseases, National
Center for Immunization and Respiratory Disease, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, 1600 Clifton Rd., NE MS G-10, Atlanta, GA, 30333, USA.
cburns@cdc.gov.
(2)Polio and Picornavirus Laboratory Branch, Division of Viral Diseases, National
Center for Immunizationand Respiratory Disease, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA.

Virologic surveillance is essential to the success of the World Health
Organization initiative to eradicate poliomyelitis. Molecular methods have been
used to detect polioviruses in tissue culture isolates derived from stool samples
obtained through surveillance for acute flaccid paralysis. This chapter describes
the use of realtime PCR assays to identify and serotype polioviruses. In
particular, a degenerate, inosine-containing, panpoliovirus (panPV) PCR primer
set is used to distinguish polioviruses from NPEVs. The high degree of nucleotide
sequence diversity among polioviruses presents a challenge to the systematic
design of nucleic acid-based reagents. To accommodate the wide variability and
rapid evolution of poliovirus genomes, degenerate codon positions on the template
were matched to mixed-base or deoxyinosine residues on both the primers and the
TaqMan™ probes. Additional assays distinguish between Sabin vaccine strains and
non-Sabin strains. This chapter also describes the use of generic poliovirus
specific primers, along with degenerate and inosine-containing primers, for
routine VP1 sequencing of poliovirus isolates. These primers, along with
nondegenerate serotype-specific Sabin primers, can also be used to sequence
individual polioviruses in mixtures.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-3292-4_9 
PMID: 26983735  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Viruses. 2016 Feb 4;8(2). pii: E39. doi: 10.3390/v8020039.

Generation of Recombinant Polioviruses Harboring RNA Affinity Tags in the 5' and 
3' Noncoding Regions of Genomic RNAs.

Flather D(1), Cathcart AL(2)(3), Cruz C(4), Baggs E(5), Ngo T(6), Gershon PD(7), 
Semler BL(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine,
University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA. dflather@uci.edu.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine,
University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA. andrea.cathcart@gilead.com.
(3)Present address: Gilead Sciences, Inc., Foster City, CA 94404, USA.
andrea.cathcart@gilead.com.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine,
University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA. cruzc3@uci.edu.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine,
University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA. ebaggs@uci.edu.
(6)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California,
Irvine, CA 92697, USA. tngo5@uci.edu.
(7)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California,
Irvine, CA 92697, USA. pgershon@uci.edu.
(8)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine,
University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA. blsemler@uci.edu.

Despite being intensely studied for more than 50 years, a complete understanding 
of the enterovirus replication cycle remains elusive. Specifically, only a
handful of cellular proteins have been shown to be involved in the RNA
replication cycle of these viruses. In an effort to isolate and identify
additional cellular proteins that function in enteroviral RNA replication, we
have generated multiple recombinant polioviruses containing RNA affinity tags
within the 3' or 5' noncoding region of the genome. These recombinant viruses
retained RNA affinity sequences within the genome while remaining viable and
infectious over multiple passages in cell culture. Further characterization of
these viruses demonstrated that viral protein production and growth kinetics were
unchanged or only slightly altered relative to wild type poliovirus. However,
attempts to isolate these genetically-tagged viral genomes from infected cells
have been hindered by high levels of co-purification of nonspecific proteins and 
the limited matrix-binding efficiency of RNA affinity sequences. Regardless,
these recombinant viruses represent a step toward more thorough characterization 
of enterovirus ribonucleoprotein complexes involved in RNA replication.

DOI: 10.3390/v8020039 
PMCID: PMC4776194
PMID: 26861382  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Clin Infect Dis. 2016 Jan 15;62(2):190-198. doi: 10.1093/cid/civ831. Epub 2015
Sep 28.

Genomic Surveillance Elucidates Persistent Wild Poliovirus Transmission During
2013-2015 in Major Reservoir Areas of Pakistan.

Alam MM(1), Sharif S(1), Shaukat S(1), Angez M(1), Khurshid A(1), Rehman L(1),
Zaidi SSZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, National Institute of Health, Chak Shahzad, Islamabad,
Pakistan.

Comment in
    Clin Infect Dis. 2016 Jan 15;62(2):199.

BACKGROUND: Despite tremendous efforts in the fight against polio, Pakistan bears
the highest proportion of poliomyelitis cases among the 3 endemic countries
including Afghanistan and Nigeria. Apart from insecurity and inaccessibility
challenges, the substantial shift of unimmunized children from North Waziristan
due to recent military operations was presumed to favor the widespread poliovirus
infection in Pakistan.
METHODS: To better understand the current epidemiological situation, we analyzed 
the virologic data of wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) strains detected in Pakistan 
during 2013-2015.
RESULTS: Five genetic clusters (A-E) were identified with at least 5% nucleotide 
divergence in the viral protein 1 (VP1) coding region. Peshawar, Quetta, and
Karachi were found to be the major endemic foci where multiple discrete genetic
lineages of WPV1 were detected. Phylogenetic analysis suggests that wild
poliovirus strains from endemic regions were genetically distant (with 5%-15% VP1
nucleotide divergence) from those detected in North Waziristan cases, excluding
the possibility of a recent progenitor of WPV1 instigating single-source
transmission across the country. Orphan lineages detected in Rawalpindi, Lahore, 
Hyderabad, Sukkur, and Jacobabad revealed silent transmission and the need for
vigilant surveillance. Sustenance of analogous genetic lineages over a period of 
3 years highlights multiple unimmunized foci present to maintain viral genetic
diversity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings are inconsistent with the hypothesis that impoverished 
populations from North Waziristan serve as a possible determinant of widespread
poliomyelitis infection in Pakistan and further emphasize the need to scale-up
clinical and environmental surveillance as well as immunization activities.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/civ831 
PMID: 26417032  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 28;10(8):e0135765. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135765.
eCollection 2015.

Has Wild Poliovirus Been Eliminated from Nigeria?

Famulare M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Disease Modeling, Bellevue, WA, United States of America.

Wild poliovirus type 3 (WPV3) has not been seen anywhere since the last case of
WPV3-associated paralysis in Nigeria in November 2012. At the time of writing,
the most recent case of wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) in Nigeria occurred in July
2014, and WPV1 has not been seen in Africa since a case in Somalia in August
2014. No cases associated with circulating vaccine-derived type 2 poliovirus
(cVDPV2) have been detected in Nigeria since November 2014. Has WPV1 been
eliminated from Africa? Has WPV3 been eradicated globally? Has Nigeria
interrupted cVDPV2 transmission? These questions are difficult because polio
surveillance is based on paralysis and paralysis only occurs in a small fraction 
of infections. This report provides estimates for the probabilities of poliovirus
elimination in Nigeria given available data as of March 31, 2015. It is based on 
a model of disease transmission that is built from historical polio incidence
rates and is designed to represent the uncertainties in transmission dynamics and
poliovirus detection that are fundamental to interpreting long time periods
without cases. The model estimates that, as of March 31, 2015, the probability of
WPV1 elimination in Nigeria is 84%, and that if WPV1 has not been eliminated, a
new case will be detected with 99% probability by the end of 2015. The
probability of WPV3 elimination (and thus global eradication) is > 99%. However, 
it is unlikely that the ongoing transmission of cVDPV2 has been interrupted; the 
probability of cVDPV2 elimination rises to 83% if no new cases are detected by
April 2016.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135765 
PMCID: PMC4552877
PMID: 26317401  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Curr Opin Virol. 2015 Aug;13:81-5. doi: 10.1016/j.coviro.2015.05.007. Epub 2015
Jun 12.

Cytotoxic and immunogenic mechanisms of recombinant oncolytic poliovirus.

Brown MC(1), Gromeier M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics & Microbiology, Duke University Medical
Center, Box 3020, Research Drive, Durham, NC 27710, USA; Department of
Neurosurgery, Duke University Medical Center, Box 3020, Research Drive, Durham,
NC 27710, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics & Microbiology, Duke University Medical
Center, Box 3020, Research Drive, Durham, NC 27710, USA; Department of
Neurosurgery, Duke University Medical Center, Box 3020, Research Drive, Durham,
NC 27710, USA. Electronic address: grome001@mc.duke.edu.

An oncolytic virus (OV) based on poliovirus (PV), the highly attenuated
polio/rhinovirus recombinant PVSRIPO, may deliver targeted inflammatory cancer
cell killing; a principle that is showing promise in clinical trials for
recurrent glioblastoma (GBM). The two decisive factors in PVSRIPO anti-tumor
efficacy are selective cytotoxicity and its in situ immunogenic imprint. While
our work is focused on what constitutes PVSRIPO cancer cytotoxicity, we are also 
studying how this engenders host immune responses that are vital to tumor
regression. We hypothesize that PVSRIPO cytotoxicity and immunogenicity are
inextricably linked in essential, complimentary roles that define the
anti-neoplastic response. Herein we delineate mechanisms we unraveled to decipher
the basis for PVSRIPO cytotoxicity and its immunotherapeutic potential.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.coviro.2015.05.007 
PMCID: PMC4550519
PMID: 26083317  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Virology. 2015 May;479-480:444-9. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2015.03.044. Epub 2015 Apr
15.

Escape of non-enveloped virus from intact cells.

Bird SW(1), Kirkegaard K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, United States.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, United States; Department of Genetics, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, United States. Electronic
address: karlak@stanford.edu.

How do viruses spread from cell to cell? Enveloped viruses acquire their
surrounding membranes by budding. If a newly enveloped virus has budded through
the plasma membrane, it finds itself outside the cell immediately. If it has
budded through the bounding membrane of an internal compartment such as the ER,
the virus finds itself in the lumen, from which it can exit the cell via the
conventional secretion pathway. Thus, although some enveloped viruses destroy the
cells they infect, there is no topological need to do so. On the other hand,
naked viruses such as poliovirus lack an external membrane. They are
protein-nucleic acid complexes within the cytoplasm or nucleus of the infected
cell, like a ribosome, a spliceosome or an aggregate of Huntingtin protein. The
simplest way for such a particle to pass through the single lipid bilayer that
separates it from the outside of the cell would be to violate the integrity of
that bilayer. Thus, it is not surprising that the primary mode of exit for
non-enveloped viruses is cell lysis. However, more complex exit strategies are
possible, such as the creation of new compartments whose complex topologies allow
the exit of cytoplasm and its contents without violating the integrity of the
cell. Here we will discuss the non-lytic spread of poliovirus and recent
observations of such compartments during viral infection with several different
picornaviruses.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2015.03.044 
PMCID: PMC4440412
PMID: 25890822  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Virology. 2015 Aug;482:28-31. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2015.03.005. Epub 2015 Mar 30.

Effect of time at temperature on wild poliovirus titers in stool specimens.

Walker AT(1), Williams AJ(2), Gary HE Jr(2), Pallansch MA(3), Wassilak SG(2),
Oberste MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Global Immunization Division, Center for Global Health, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC), USA. Electronic address: atwalker@cdc.gov.
(2)Global Immunization Division, Center for Global Health, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC), USA.
(3)Division of Viral Diseases, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory
Diseases, CDC, USA.

BACKGROUND: The effect of transport temperature on the viability of poliovirus in
stool specimens from paralyzed cases has not been tested. Quality assurance of
programmatic indicators will be necessary in the final phase of polio
eradication.
OBJECTIVE: To estimate the effect of time at elevated temperatures on wild
poliovirus titers in stool specimens.
METHODS: We exposed aliquots of pooled wild poliovirus type 1 specimens to
elevated temperatures (27 °C, 31 °C, and 35 °C) for varying time periods up to 14
days. We determined the virus titer of these aliquots and created decay curves at
each temperature to estimate the relationship between time at temperature and
virus titer.
RESULTS: We found significantly different slopes of decay at each temperature.
The negative slopes increased as the temperature increased.
CONCLUSIONS: While poliovirus in stool remains relatively stable at moderately
elevated temperature, transport at higher temperatures could impact sample
integrity and virus isolation results.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2015.03.005 
PMCID: PMC4620922
PMID: 25817402  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Virol. 2015 Apr;89(8):4143-57. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03101-14. Epub 2015 Jan 28.

Nectin-like interactions between poliovirus and its receptor trigger
conformational changes associated with cell entry.

Strauss M(1), Filman DJ(1), Belnap DM(2), Cheng N(3), Noel RT(4), Hogle JM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Structural Biology Research, National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Brigham Young University,
Provo, Utah, USA Departments of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Utah,
Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Structural Biology Research, National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Brigham Young University, Provo,
Utah, USA.
(5)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA james_hogle@hms.harvard.edu.

Poliovirus infection is initiated by attachment to a receptor on the cell surface
called Pvr or CD155. At physiological temperatures, the receptor catalyzes an
irreversible expansion of the virus to form an expanded form of the capsid called
the 135S particle. This expansion results in the externalization of the
myristoylated capsid protein VP4 and the N-terminal extension of the capsid
protein VP1, both of which become inserted into the cell membrane. Structures of 
the expanded forms of poliovirus and of several related viruses have recently
been reported. However, until now, it has been unclear how receptor binding
triggers viral expansion at physiological temperature. Here, we report poliovirus
in complex with an enzymatically partially deglycosylated form of the 3-domain
ectodomain of Pvr at a 4-Å resolution, as determined by cryo-electron microscopy.
The interaction of the receptor with the virus in this structure is reminiscent
of the interactions of Pvr with its natural ligands. At a low temperature, the
receptor induces very few changes in the structure of the virus, with the largest
changes occurring within the footprint of the receptor, and in a loop of the
internal protein VP4. Changes in the vicinity of the receptor include the
displacement of a natural lipid ligand (called "pocket factor"), demonstrating
that the loss of this ligand, alone, is not sufficient to induce particle
expansion. Finally, analogies with naturally occurring ligand binding in the
nectin family suggest which specific structural rearrangements in the
virus-receptor complex could help to trigger the irreversible expansion of the
capsid.IMPORTANCE: The cell-surface receptor (Pvr) catalyzes a large structural
change in the virus that exposes membrane-binding protein chains. We fitted known
atomic models of the virus and Pvr into three-dimensional experimental maps of
the receptor-virus complex. The molecular interactions we see between poliovirus 
and its receptor are reminiscent of the nectin family, by involving the burying
of otherwise-exposed hydrophobic groups. Importantly, poliovirus expansion is
regulated by the binding of a lipid molecule within the viral capsid. We show
that receptor binding either causes this molecule to be expelled or requires it, 
but that its loss is not sufficient to trigger irreversible expansion. Based on
our model, we propose testable hypotheses to explain how the viral shell becomes 
destabilized, leading to RNA uncoating. These findings give us a better
understanding of how poliovirus has evolved to exploit a natural process of its
host to penetrate the membrane barrier.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.03101-14 
PMCID: PMC4442392
PMID: 25631086  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Clin Infect Dis. 2015 Apr 1;60(7):1057-64. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciu1136. Epub 2014
Dec 30.

Genetic analysis and characterization of wild poliovirus type 1 during sustained 
transmission in a population with >95% vaccine coverage, Israel 2013.

Shulman LM(1), Martin J(2), Sofer D(1), Burns CC(3), Manor Y(1), Hindiyeh M(1),
Gavrilin E(4), Wilton T(2), Moran-Gilad J(5), Gamzo R(5), Mendelson E(1), Grotto 
I(5); GPI (Genotype–Phenotype Identification) Group; GPI Genotype-Phenotype
Identification Group.

Collaborators: Chen Q, Dybdahl-Sissoko N, Iber J, Mandelbaum M, Oberste S,
Penaranda S, Rogers S, Agabiev I, Alfandari J, Azar R, Halmut T, Indenbaum V,
Mandelbaum M, Michaeli M, Mor O, Perepliotchikov Y, Rom D, Silberstein I, Weil M,
Anis E, Kaliner E, Kopel E, Singer-Shepherd R, Dunn G, Li L, Pfeifer D.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Services, Israel Ministry of Health, Central Virology
Laboratory, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel.
(2)Division of Virology, National Institute for Biological Standards and Control,
Hertfordshire, United Kingdom.
(3)Polio and Picornavirus Laboratory Branch, Division of Viral Diseases, Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia.
(4)World Health Organization EUROPE, Regional Polio Laboratory Network,
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Ministry of Health, Jerusalem, Israel.

Comment in
    Clin Infect Dis. 2015 Apr 1;60(7):1065-7.

BACKGROUND: Israel has >95% polio vaccine coverage with the last 9 birth cohorts 
immunized exclusively with inactivated polio vaccine (IPV). Using acute flaccid
paralysis and routine, monthly countrywide environmental surveillance, no wild
poliovirus circulation was detected between 1989 and February 2013, after which
wild type 1 polioviruses South Asia genotype (WPV1-SOAS) have persistently
circulated in southern Israel and intermittently in other areas without any
paralytic cases as determined by intensified surveillance of environmental and
human samples. We aimed to characterize antigenic and neurovirulence properties
of WPV1-SOAS silently circulating in a highly vaccinated population.
METHODS: WPV1-SOAS capsid genes from environmental and stool surveillance
isolates were sequenced, their neurovirulence was determined using transgenic
mouse expressing the human poliovirus receptor (Tg21-PVR) mice, and their
antigenicity was characterized by in vitro neutralization using human sera,
epitope-specific monoclonal murine anti-oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV) antibodies,
and sera from IPV-immunized rats and mice.
RESULTS: WPV1 amino acid sequences in neutralizing epitopes varied from Sabin 1
and Mahoney, with little variation among WPV1 isolates. Neutralization by
monoclonal antibodies against 3 of 4 OPV epitopes was lost. Three-fold lower
geometric mean titers (Z = -4.018; P < .001, Wilcoxon signed-rank test) against
WPV1 than against Mahoney in human serum correlated with 4- to 6-fold lower
neutralization titers in serum from IPV-immunized rats and mice. WPV1-SOAS
isolates were neurovirulent (50% intramuscular paralytic dose in Tg21-PVR mice:
log10(7.0)). IPV-immunized mice were protected against WPV1-induced paralysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Phenotypic and antigenic profile changes of WPV1-SOAS may have
contributed to the intense silent transmission, whereas the reduced
neurovirulence may have contributed to the absence of paralytic cases in the
background of high population immunity.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciu1136 
PMID: 25550350  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Clin Virol. 2015 Jan;62:80-3. doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2014.11.027. Epub 2014 Nov 29.

Circulating vaccine-derived polioviruses in the Extreme North region of Cameroon.

Endegue-Zanga MC(1), Sadeuh-Mba SA(1), Iber J(2), Burns C(2), Nimpa-Mengouo M(3),
Demanou M(1), Vernet G(1), Etoa FX(4), Njouom R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Centre Pasteur of Cameroon, P.O. Box 1274, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(2)Division of Viral and Rickettsial Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(3)WHO Cameroon Country Office, P.O. Box 155, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(4)The University of Yaoundé I, P.O. Box 337, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(5)Centre Pasteur of Cameroon, P.O. Box 1274, Yaoundé, Cameroon. Electronic
address: njouom@pasteur-yaounde.org.

BACKGROUND: The World Health Organization (WHO) poliovirus eradication program
includes careful surveillance of acute-flaccid paralysis (AFP) and mass and
routine immunization with oral polio vaccine (OPV). In populations with low
vaccine coverage, the live-attenuated Sabin strains, OPV types 1, 2 and 3, can
evolve into virulent vaccine-derived polioviruses (VDPVs) and circulate in the
community. Until recently, circulating VDPVs (cVDPVs) had not been reported in
Cameroon despite the fact that VDPV2 outbreaks have occurred in nearby countries.
OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to characterize virus isolates from four AFP
patients infected with cVDPV2 in the Extreme North region of Cameroon in 2013.
STUDY DESIGN: The complete VP1 region of the four VDPV strains was sequenced and 
the relationships with cVDPVs from neighboring countries were investigated.
RESULTS: All four patients were infected by cVDPV2 strains showing 1.2-2.0%
nucleotide difference compared to the reference Sabin 2 VP1 sequence.
Phylogenetic analysis indicated that the VDPV strains were genetically linked to 
cVDPV2 lineages of the recent Chad cVDPV2 outbreak.
CONCLUSIONS: The circulation of pathogenic VDPVs suggests that there are
localized immunization gaps in some districts like Makary, Mada and Kolofata in
Cameroon. To avoid poliomyelitis outbreaks in Cameroon, especially in the
districts close to neighboring countries with ongoing cVDPV outbreaks, high polio
vaccine coverage is essential.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcv.2014.11.027 
PMID: 25542478  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2015;28(17):2096-9. doi:
10.3109/14767058.2014.979147. Epub 2014 Nov 14.

Circulating type 1 vaccine-derived poliovirus may evolve under the pressure of
adenosine deaminases acting on RNA.

Liu Y(1), Ma T(1), Liu J(1), Zhao X(1), Cheng Z(1), Guo H(1), Xu R(1), Wang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)a College of Veterinary Medicine, Research Center for Animal Disease Control
Engineering Shandong Province , Shandong Agricultural University , Tai`an ,
China.

Poliovirus, the causative agent of poliomyelitis, is a human enterovirus and
member of the Picornaviridae family. An effective live-attenuated poliovirus
vaccine strain (Sabin 1) has been developed and has protected humans from polio. 
However, a few cases of vaccine virulence reversion have been documented in
several countries. For instance, circulating type 1 vaccine-derived poliovirus is
a highly pathogenic poliovirus that evolved from an avirulent strain, but the
mechanism by which vaccine strains undergo reversion remains unclear. In this
study, vaccine strains exhibited A to G/U to C and G to A/C to U hypermutations
in the reversed evolution of Sabin 1. Furthermore, the mutation ratios of U to C 
and C to U were higher than those of other mutation types. Dinucleotide editing
context was then analyzed. Results showed that A to G and U to C mutations
exhibited preferences similar to adenosine deaminases acting on RNA (ADAR).
Hence, ADARs may participate in poliovirus vaccine evolution.

DOI: 10.3109/14767058.2014.979147 
PMID: 25330844  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Infect Dis. 2014 Nov 1;210 Suppl 1:S353-60. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiu069.

Outbreak of type 1 wild poliovirus infection in adults, Namibia, 2006.

Yusuf N(1), de Wee R(2), Foster N(2), Watkins MA(3), Tiruneh D(4), Chauvin C(5), 
Bossarte R(3), Mandlhate C(4), Jack A(1), Gumede N(6), Mawela A(6), Burns CC(7), 
Pallansch MA(7), Allies T(2), Rainey J(3), Mataruse N(1), Nshimirimana D(8).

Author information: 
(1)World Health Organization (WHO) Intercountry Program Office, Harare, Zimbabwe.
(2)Ministry of Health and Social Services.
(3)Global Immunization Division, Center for Global Health.
(4)WHO Country Office, Windhoek, Namibia.
(5)WHO Headquarters, Geneva, Switzerland.
(6)National Institute for Communicable Disease, National Health Laboratory
Service, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(7)Division of Viral Diseases, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory
Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia.
(8)WHO Regional Office for Africa, Brazzaville, Republic of Congo.

A paralytic poliomyelitis outbreak occurred in Namibia in 2006, almost
exclusively among adults. Nineteen cases were virologically confirmed as due to
wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1), and 26 were classified as polio compatible. Eleven
deaths occurred among confirmed and compatible cases (24%). Of the confirmed
cases, 97% were aged 15-45 years, 89% were male, and 71% lived in settlement
areas in Windhoek. The virus was genetically related to a virus detected in 2005 
in Angola, which had been imported earlier from India. The outbreak is likely due
to immunity gaps among adults who were inadequately vaccinated during childhood. 
This outbreak underscores the ongoing risks posed by poliovirus importations, the
importance of maintaining strong acute flaccid paralysis surveillance even in
adults, and the need to maintain high population immunity to avoid polio
outbreaks in the preeradication period and outbreaks due to vaccine-derived
polioviruses in the posteradication era.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiu069 
PMID: 25316855  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Infect Dis. 2014 Nov 1;210 Suppl 1:S324-32. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiu160.

Detection of multiple cocirculating wild poliovirus type 1 lineages through
environmental surveillance: impact and progress during 2011-2013 in Pakistan.

Alam MM(1), Shaukat S(1), Sharif S(1), Angez M(1), Khurshid A(1), Malik F(1),
Rehman L(1), Zaidi SS(1).

Author information: 
(1)WHO Regional Reference Laboratory for Polio Eradication Initiative, Department
of Virology, National Institute of Health, Chak Shahzad, Islamabad, Pakistan.

BACKGROUND: The environmental surveillance has proven to be a useful tool to
identify poliovirus circulation in different countries and was started in
Pakistan during July 2009 to support the acute flaccid paralysis (AFP)
surveillance system.
METHODS: Sewage samples were collected from 27 environmental sampling (ENV) sites
and processed for poliovirus isolation through 2-phase separation method.
Poliovirus isolates were identified as Sabin-like or wild type through real-time 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Wild-type strains were subjected to VP1 gene
sequencing and phylogenetic analysis performed using MEGA 5.0.
RESULTS: During 2011-2013, a total of 668 samples were collected from 4 provinces
that resulted in 40% of samples positive for wild poliovirus type-1 (WPV-1). None
of the samples were positive for WPV-3. The areas with high frequency of WPV-1
detection were Karachi-Gadap (69%), Peshawar (82%), and Rawalpindi (65%), whereas
the samples from Quetta and Sukkur remained negative for WPV during 2013.
Phylogenetic analysis revealed 3 major clusters with multiple poliovirus lineages
circulating across different country areas as well as in bordering areas of
Afghanistan.
CONCLUSIONS: Environmental surveillance in Pakistan has been proven to be a
powerful tool to detect WPV circulation in the absence of poliomyelitis cases in 
many communities. Our findings emphasize the need to continue and expand such
surveillance activities to other high-risk areas in the country.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiu160 
PMID: 25316851  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Infect Dis. 2014 Nov 1;210 Suppl 1:S315-23. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiu183.

Detection of vaccine-derived polioviruses in Mexico using environmental
surveillance.

Esteves-Jaramillo A(1), Estívariz CF(2), Peñaranda S(3), Richardson VL(1), Reyna 
J(1), Coronel DL(1), Carrión V(4), Landaverde JM(4), Wassilak SG(2),
Pérez-Sánchez EE(5), López-Martínez I(5), Burns CC(3), Pallansch MA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centro Nacional para la Salud de la Infancia y Adolescencia, México DF.
(2)Global Immunization Division, Center for Global Health, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention.
(3)Division of Viral Diseases, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory
Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia.
(4)Pan American Health Organization, Washington, District of Columbia.
(5)Instituto de Diagnóstico y Referencia Epidemiológico, México DF.

BACKGROUND: Early detection and control of vaccine-derived poliovirus (VDPV)
emergences are essential to secure the gains of polio eradication.
METHODS: Serial sewage samples were collected in 4 towns of Mexico before,
throughout, and after the May 2010 oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV) mass
immunization campaign. Isolation and molecular analysis of polioviruses from
sewage specimens monitored the duration of vaccine-related strains in the
environment and emergence of vaccine-derived polioviruses in a population
partially immunized with inactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV).
RESULTS: Sabin strains were identified up to 5-8 weeks after the campaign in all 
towns; in Aguascalientes, 1 Sabin 3 was isolated 16 weeks after the campaign,
following 7 weeks with no Sabin strains detected. In Tuxtla Gutiérrez, type 2
VDPV was isolated from 4 samples collected before and during the campaign, and
type 1 VDPV from 1 sample collected 19 weeks afterward. During 2009-2010,
coverage in 4 OPV campaigns conducted averaged only 57% and surveillance for
acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) was suboptimal (AFP rate<1 per 100,000
population<15 years of age) in Tuxtla Gutierrez.
CONCLUSIONS: VDPVs may emerge and spread in settings with inadequate coverage
with IPV/OPV vaccination. Environmental surveillance can facilitate early
detection in these settings.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Infectious Diseases Society
of America 2014. This work is written by (a) US Government employee(s) and is in 
the public domain in the US.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiu183 
PMID: 25316850  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Infect Dis. 2014 Nov 1;210 Suppl 1:S283-93. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiu295.

Vaccine-derived polioviruses.

Burns CC(1), Diop OM(2), Sutter RW(2), Kew OM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Viral Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Atlanta, Georgia.
(2)World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.

The attenuated oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV) has many properties favoring its use
in polio eradication: ease of administration, efficient induction of intestinal
immunity, induction of durable humoral immunity, and low cost. Despite these
advantages, OPV has the disadvantage of genetic instability, resulting in rare
and sporadic cases of vaccine-associated paralytic poliomyelitis (VAPP) and the
emergence of genetically divergent vaccine-derived polioviruses (VDPVs). Whereas 
VAPP is an adverse event following exposure to OPV, VDPVs are polioviruses whose 
genetic properties indicate prolonged replication or transmission. Three
categories of VDPVs are recognized: (1) circulating VDPVs (cVDPVs) from outbreaks
in settings of low OPV coverage, (2) immunodeficiency-associated VDPVs (iVDPVs)
from individuals with primary immunodeficiencies, and (3) ambiguous VDPVs
(aVDPVs), which cannot be definitively assigned to either of the first 2
categories. Because most VDPVs are type 2, the World Health Organization's plans 
call for coordinated worldwide replacement of trivalent OPV with bivalent OPV
containing poliovirus types 1 and 3.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Infectious Diseases Society
of America 2014. This work is written by (a) US Government employee(s) and is in 
the public domain in the US.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiu295 
PMID: 25316847  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Med Microbiol. 2014 Dec;63(Pt 12):1724-31. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.081992-0. Epub
2014 Sep 26.

Bioinformatics analysis and genetic diversity of the poliovirus.

Liu Y(1), Ma T(1), Liu J(2), Zhao X(1), Cheng Z(1), Guo H(1), Wang S(1), Xu R(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Research Center for Animal Disease Control
Engineering Shandong Province, Shandong Agricultural University, Tai'an 271018,
PR China.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Research Center for Animal Disease Control
Engineering Shandong Province, Shandong Agricultural University, Tai'an 271018,
PR China Liujz@sdau.edu.cn vetliujz@163.com.

Poliomyelitis, a disease which can manifest as muscle paralysis, is caused by the
poliovirus, which is a human enterovirus and member of the family Picornaviridae 
that usually transmits by the faecal-oral route. The viruses of the OPV (oral
poliovirus attenuated-live vaccine) strains can mutate in the human intestine
during replication and some of these mutations can lead to the recovery of
serious neurovirulence. Informatics research of the poliovirus genome can be used
to explain further the characteristics of this virus. In this study, sequences
from 100 poliovirus isolates were acquired from GenBank. To determine the
evolutionary relationship between the strains, we compared and analysed the
sequences of the complete poliovirus genome and the VP1 region. The reconstructed
phylogenetic trees for the complete sequences and the VP1 sequences were both
divided into two branches, indicating that the genetic relationships of the whole
poliovirus genome and the VP1 sequences are very similar. This branching
indicates that the virulence and pathogenicity of poliomyelitis may be associated
with the VP1 region. Sequence alignment of the VP1 region revealed numerous
mutation sites in which mutation rates of >30 % were detected. In a group of
strains recorded in the USA, mutation sites and mutation types were the same and 
this may be associated with their distribution in the evolutionary tree and their
genetic relationship. In conclusion, the genetic evolutionary relationships of
poliovirus isolate sequences are determined to a great extent by the VP1 protein,
and poliovirus strains located on the same branch of the phylogenetic tree
contain the same mutation spots and mutation types. Hence, the genetic
characteristics of the VP1 region in the poliovirus genome should be analysed to 
identify the transmission route of poliovirus and provide the basis of viral
immunity development.

© 2014 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.081992-0 
PMID: 25261065  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 17;9(9):e107697. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107697.
eCollection 2014.

Molecular characterization and phylogenetic relationship of wild type 1
poliovirus strains circulating across Pakistan and Afghanistan bordering areas
during 2010-2012.

Shaukat S(1), Angez M(1), Alam MM(1), Sharif S(1), Khurshid A(1), Malik F(1),
Rehman L(1), Zaidi SS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, National Institute of Health, Chak Shahzad, Islamabad,
Pakistan.

Pakistan and Afghanistan share a long uncontrolled border with extensive
population movement on both sides. Wild poliovirus transmission has never been
interrupted in this block due to war against terrorism, poor public health
infrastructure, misconceptions about polio vaccines and inadequate immunization
activities. All these issues complicate the eradication operations and reinforce 
the complexity of wiping out poliomyelitis from this region. This study
illustrates the origins and routes of cross-border wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) 
transmission during 2010-2012 between Pakistan and Afghanistan. Sequence analyses
were conducted based on complete VP1 capsid protein sequences for WPV1 study
strains to determine the origin of poliovirus genetic lineages and their
evolutionary relationships. Phylogenetic tree was constructed from VP1 gene
sequences applying Maximum Likelihood method using Kimura 2- parameter model in
MEGA program v 5.0. A total of 72 (14.3%) out of 502 wild-type 1 polioviruses
were found circulating in border areas of both countries during 2010-2012.
Molecular phylogenetic analysis classified these strains in to two sub-genotypes 
with four clusters and 18 lineages. Genetic data confirmed that the most of WPV1 
lineages (12; 66.6%) were transmitted from Pakistan to Afghanistan. However, the 
genetic diversity was significantly reduced during 2012 as most of the lineages
were completely eliminated. In conclusion, Pakistan-Afghanistan block has emerged
as a single poliovirus reservoir sharing the multiple poliovirus lineages due to 
uncontrolled movement of people across the borders between two countries. If it
is neglected, it can jeopardize the extensive global efforts done so-far to
eradicate the poliovirus infection. Our data will be helpful to devise the
preventive strategies for effective control of wild poliovirus transmission in
this region.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107697 
PMCID: PMC4168008
PMID: 25229826  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Virol. 2014 Oct;88(20):11955-64. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01809-14. Epub 2014 Aug 6.

Effect of formaldehyde inactivation on poliovirus.

Wilton T(1), Dunn G(2), Eastwood D(3), Minor PD(2), Martin J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, National Institute for Biological Standards and Control,
Potters Bar, Hertfordshire, United Kingdom thomas.wilton@nibsc.org.
(2)Division of Virology, National Institute for Biological Standards and Control,
Potters Bar, Hertfordshire, United Kingdom.
(3)Division of Biotherapeutics, National Institute for Biological Standards and
Control, Potters Bar, Hertfordshire, United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    J Virol. 2014 Dec;88(23):13928.

Inactivated polio vaccines, which have been used in many countries for more than 
50 years, are produced by treating live poliovirus (PV) with formaldehyde.
However, the molecular mechanisms underlying virus inactivation are not well
understood. Infection by PV is initiated by virus binding to specific cell
receptors, which results in viral particles undergoing sequential conformational 
changes that generate altered structural forms (135S and 80S particles) and leads
to virus cell entry. We have analyzed the ability of inactivated PV to bind to
the human poliovirus receptor (hPVR) using various techniques such as
ultracentrifugation, fluorescence-activated cell sorting flow cytometry and
real-time reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR). The results showed that although
retaining the ability to bind to hPVR, inactivated PV bound less efficiently in
comparison to live PV. We also found that inactivated PV showed resistance to
structural conversion in vitro, as judged by measuring changes in antigenicity,
the ability to bind to hPVR, and viral RNA release at high temperature.
Furthermore, viral RNA from inactivated PV was shown to be modified, since cDNA
yields obtained by RT-PCR amplification were severely reduced and no infectious
virus was recovered after RNA transfection into susceptible cells. Importance:
This study represents a novel insight into the molecular mechanisms responsible
for poliovirus inactivation. We show that inactivation with formaldehyde has an
effect on early steps of viral replication as it reduces the ability of PV to
bind to hPVR, decreases the sensitivity of PV to convert to 135S particles, and
abolishes the infectivity of its viral RNA. These changes are likely responsible 
for the loss of infectivity shown by PV following inactivation. Techniques used
in this study represent new approaches for the characterization of inactivated PV
products and could be useful in developing improved methods for the production
and quality control testing of inactivated polio vaccines. Measuring the
antigenicity, capsid stability, and RNA integrity of inactivated PV samples could
help establishing the optimal balance between the loss of infectivity and the
preservation of virus antigenicity during inactivation.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01809-14 
PMCID: PMC4178759
PMID: 25100844  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Infect Dis. 2014 Sep 15;210(6):853-64. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiu182. Epub 2014
Mar 31.

Influence of enteric infections on response to oral poliovirus vaccine: a
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Parker EP(1), Kampmann B(2), Kang G(3), Grassly NC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, St Mary's Campus, Imperial College London, United
Kingdom MRC Unit, The Gambia, Fajara.
(3)Division of Gastrointestinal Sciences, Christian Medical College, Vellore,
India.

BACKGROUND: The impaired immunogenicity of oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV) in
low-income countries has been apparent since the early field trials of this
vaccine. Infection with enteropathogens at the time of vaccination may contribute
to this phenomenon. However, the relative influence of these infections on OPV
performance remains uncertain.
METHODS: We conducted a systematic review to examine the impact of concurrent
enteric infections on OPV response. Using random-effects models, we assessed the 
effects of nonpolio enteroviruses (NPEVs) and diarrhea on the odds of
seroconversion and/or vaccine virus shedding.
RESULTS: We identified 25 trials in which OPV outcomes were compared according to
the presence or absence of enteric infections, the majority of which (n = 17)
reported only on NPEVs. Concurrent NPEVs significantly reduced the odds of
per-dose seroconversion for type 1 poliovirus (odds ratio [OR] 0.44, 95%
confidence interval 0.23-0.84), but not type 2 (OR 0.53 [0.19-1.46]) or type 3
(OR 0.56 [0.27-1.12]). A similar reduction, significant for type 1 poliovirus (OR
0.50 [0.28-0.89]), was observed in the odds of vaccine virus shedding among
NPEV-infected individuals. Concurrent diarrhea significantly inhibited per-dose
seroconversion overall (OR 0.61 [0.38-0.87]).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings are consistent with an inhibitory effect of concurrent 
enteric infections on OPV response.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiu182 
PMCID: PMC4136801
PMID: 24688069  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Pharm Pat Anal. 2012 Nov;1(5):589-99. doi: 10.4155/ppa.12.70.

Innovative IPV from attenuated Sabin poliovirus or newly designed alternative
seed strains.

Hamidi A(1), Bakker WA.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Public Health & the Environment (RIVM), Centre for
Infectious Disease Control (CIb), Vaccinology unit, P.O. Box 1, 3720 BA
Bilthoven, The Netherlands.

This article gives an overview of the patent literature related to innovative
inactivated polio vaccine (i-IPV) based on using Sabin poliovirus strains and
newly developed alternative recombinant poliovirus strains. This innovative
approach for IPV manufacturing is considered to attribute to the requirement for 
affordable IPV in the post-polio-eradication era, which is on the horizon.
Although IPV is a well-established vaccine, the number of patent applications in 
this field was seen to have significantly increased in the past decade.
Currently, regular IPV appears to be too expensive for universal use. Future
affordability may be achieved by using alternative cell lines, alternative virus 
seed strains, improved and optimized processes, dose sparing, or the use of
adjuvants. A relatively short-term option to achieve cost-price reduction is to
work on regular IPV, using wild-type poliovirus strains, or on Sabin-IPV, based
on using attenuated poliovirus strains. This price reduction can be achieved by
introducing efficiency in processing. There are also multiple opportunities to
work on dose sparing, for example, by using adjuvants or fractional doses.
Renewed interest in this field was clearly reflected in the number and diversity 
of patent applications. In a later stage, several innovative approaches may
become even more attractive, for example the use of recombinant virus strains or 
even a totally synthetic vaccine. Currently, such work is mainly carried out by
research institutes and universities and therefore clinical data are not
available.

DOI: 10.4155/ppa.12.70 
PMID: 24236927  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Virol Methods. 2014 Jan;195:148-55. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2013.10.004. Epub
2013 Oct 14.

Development of real-time PCR to detect oral vaccine-like poliovirus and its
application to environmental surveillance.

Iwai-Itamochi M(1), Yoshida H, Obara-Nagoya M, Horimoto E, Kurata T, Takizawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Toyama Institute of Health, 17-1 Nakataikoyama, Imizu 
City, Toyama 939-0363, Japan.

In order to perform environmental surveillance to track oral poliovirus
vaccine-like poliovirus sensitively and conveniently, real-time PCR was developed
and applied to a raw sewage concentrate. The real-time PCR method detected
0.01-0.1 TCID50 of 3 serotypes of Sabin strain specifically. The method also
detected the corresponding serotypes of oral poliovirus vaccine-like poliovirus
specifically, but detected neither wild poliovirus, except Mahoney for type 1 and
Saukett for type 3, nor other enteric viruses, as far as examined. When real-time
PCR was applied to environmental surveillance, the overall agreement rates
between real-time PCR and the cell culture were 83.3% for all serotypes. Since
real-time PCR has the advantages of rapid detection of viruses and minimum
requirement of sampling volume as compared with ordinary cell culture, it is
suitable to monitor oral poliovirus vaccine-like poliovirus in the environment,
especially in areas where an oral vaccine is being replaced by an inactivated
vaccine.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2013.10.004 
PMID: 24134937  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Med Virol. 2014 Jul;86(7):1243-8. doi: 10.1002/jmv.23803. Epub 2013 Oct 12.

Genetic analysis of poliovirus strains isolated from sewage in Poland.

Kuryk Ł(1), Wieczorek M, Diedrich S, Böttcher S, Witek A, Litwińska B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, National Institute of Public Health-National Institute
of Hygiene, Warsaw, Poland.

The study describes genetic characterization of poliovirus (PV) strains isolated 
from sewage samples in Poland. The analyses were performed for the detection of
any putative polio revertants and recombinants in three genomic regions by
sequencing analysis. Thirty-six strains were analyzed. The analyzed strains were 
identified by neutralization assay as 7 strains of serotype P1, 10 strains of
serotype P2, and 19 strains of serotype P3. Sewage isolates were sequenced in
5'UTR, VP1, and 3D genomic regions. All detected PVs were classified as vaccine
strains on the basis of VP1 sequence. Mutational differences in the VP1 sequences
of isolated viruses ranged from 0.0% to 0.4%, indicating a limited replication
period. The genetic analysis of the 3D region showed that some strains have
recombinant genomes. Nine strains were found as dipartite recombinants (seven
strains--S3/S2, one strain--S2/S1, one strain--S3/S1), while one strain was found
as tripartite recombinant (S3/S2/S1). No recombinants with non-PV enteroviruses
were identified. None of wild-type PVs or vaccine-derived polioviruses (VDPVs)
were detected. This study showed the absence of wild or VDPV circulation in the
country and demonstrated the usefulness of environmental surveillance in addition
to acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) surveillance in support of polio eradication
initiatives.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.23803 
PMID: 24123142  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Curr Protoc Microbiol. 2013;Chapter 15:Unit 15H.1. doi:
10.1002/9780471729259.mc15h01s29.

Poliovirus: generation, quantification, propagation, purification, and storage.

Burrill CP(1), Strings VR, Andino R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San
Francisco, California, USA.

Poliovirus (PV) is the prototypical picornavirus. It is a non-enveloped RNA virus
with a small (~7.5-kb) genome of positive polarity. It has long served as a model
to study RNA virus biology, pathogenesis, and evolution. cDNA clones of several
strains are available, and infectious virus can be produced by the transfection
of in vitro transcribed viral genomes into an appropriate host cell. PV infects
many human and non-human primate cell lines including HeLa and HeLa S3 cells, and
can grow to high titer in culture. Protocols for the production, propagation,
quantification, and purification of PV are presented.

© 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/9780471729259.mc15h01s29 
PMCID: PMC4826561
PMID: 23686830  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Risk Anal. 2013 Apr;33(4):703-49. doi: 10.1111/risa.12044. Epub 2013 Mar 22.

Characterizing poliovirus transmission and evolution: insights from modeling
experiences with wild and vaccine-related polioviruses.

Duintjer Tebbens RJ(1), Pallansch MA, Kalkowska DA, Wassilak SG, Cochi SL,
Thompson KM.

Author information: 
(1)Kid Risk, Inc., 10524 Moss Park Rd., Ste. 204-364, Orlando, FL 32832, USA.
rdt@kidrisk.org

With national and global health policymakers facing numerous complex decisions
related to achieving and maintaining polio eradication, we expanded our
previously developed dynamic poliovirus transmission model using information from
an expert literature review process and including additional immunity states and 
the evolution of oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV). The model explicitly considers
serotype differences and distinguishes fecal-oral and oropharyngeal transmission.
We evaluated the model by simulating diverse historical experiences with
polioviruses, including one country that eliminated wild poliovirus using both
OPV and inactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV) (USA), three importation outbreaks
of wild poliovirus (Albania, the Netherlands, Tajikistan), one situation in which
no circulating vaccine-derived polioviruses (cVDPVs) emerge despite annual OPV
use and cessation (Cuba), three cVDPV outbreaks (Haiti, Madura Island in
Indonesia, northern Nigeria), one area of current endemic circulation of all
three serotypes (northern Nigeria), and one area with recent endemic circulation 
and subsequent elimination of multiple serotypes (northern India). We find that
when sufficient information about the conditions exists, the model can reproduce 
the general behavior of poliovirus transmission and outbreaks while maintaining
consistency in the generic model inputs. The assumption of spatially homogeneous 
mixing remains a significant limitation that affects the performance of the
differential equation-based model when significant heterogeneities in immunity
and mixing may exist. Further studies on OPV virus evolution and improved
understanding of the mechanisms of mixing and transmission may help to better
characterize poliovirus transmission in populations. Broad application of the
model promises to offer insights in the context of global and national policy and
economic models.

© 2013 Society for Risk Analysis.

DOI: 10.1111/risa.12044 
PMID: 23521018  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Antiviral Res. 2013 May;98(2):186-91. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2013.03.003. Epub 
2013 Mar 13.

Anti-poliovirus activity of protease inhibitor AG-7404, and assessment of in
vitro activity in combination with antiviral capsid inhibitor compounds.

Rhoden E(1), Liu HM, Wang-Chern SW, Oberste MS.

Author information: 
(1)Polio and Picornavirus Laboratory Branch, Division of Viral Diseases, Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA. erhoden@cdc.gov

Erratum in
    Antiviral Res. 2013 Sep;99(3):436.

The National Research Council has recommended that at least one, preferably two, 
polio antiviral drugs be developed as a supplement to the tools currently
available for control of polio outbreaks post-eradication. The primary
application of such drugs is expected to be the resolution of chronic poliovirus 
excretion in persons with primary immunodeficiency disorders. We have assessed
the in vitro activity of AG-7404 (also known as "compound 1"), an inhibitor of
picornaviral 3C protease, against a large panel of programmatically important
poliovirus strains and its activity in combination with two poliovirus capsid
inhibitors, V-073 and BTA798. AG-7404 was active against all viruses in this
panel, with EC50 values ranging from 0.080 to 0.674 μM. Similarly, BTA798 was
active against all viruses in this panel, with EC50 values ranging from 0.003 to 
0.591μM. By comparison, values for V-073 were 0.003-0.126 μM. BTA798 was active
against V-073-resistant variants with an alanine to valine change in VP3 at
position 24. However, BTA798 was inactive against the V-073-resistant strains
with amino acid substitutions at VP1 amino acids 194 (equivalent to 192 in type
3) and 236. As expected from its different mechanism of action, AG-7404 was fully
active against all V-073-resistant variants, with EC₅₀ values ranging from 0.218 
to 0.819 μM, compared to values of 0.202-0.407 μM for the V-073-susceptible
parental strains. In vitro drug combination experiments demonstrated synergy
between AG-7404 and either V-073 or BTA798, whereas the combination of the two
capsid inhibitors acted additively.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2013.03.003 
PMID: 23499651  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Virol Methods. 2013 Apr;189(1):7-14. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2012.12.015. Epub 
2013 Jan 7.

Quantitative one-step RT-PCR assay for rapid and sensitive identification and
titration of polioviruses in clinical specimens.

Laassri M(1), Dipiazza A, Bidzhieva B, Zagorodnyaya T, Chumakov K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, US Food and Drug Administration,
1401 Rockville Pike, HFM 470, Rockville, MD 20852-1448, USA.
majid.laassri@fda.hhs.gov

Rapid identification and quantitation of polioviruses in clinical specimens is
important for surveillance and analysis of virus shedding by vaccine recipients, 
which could be used to assess the level of mucosal immunity. A quantitative one
step RT-PCR was developed for identification and titration of all three
poliovirus serotypes. The assay could be an alternative to the traditional
procedure based on cell culture isolation and subsequent determination of
poliovirus serotype and virus titration. The method is based on quantitative PCR 
performed with reverse transcription reaction in the same tube. The multiplex
assay that quantifies all three serotypes of poliovirus was found to be highly
specific, sensitive, and takes only one day to complete.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2012.12.015 
PMID: 23305817  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Annu Rev Microbiol. 2011;65:583-609. doi: 10.1146/annurev-micro-090110-102957.

Synthetic poliovirus and other designer viruses: what have we learned from them?

Wimmer E(1), Paul AV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, New York 11790, USA. ewimmer@ms.cc.sunysb.edu

Owing to known genome sequences, modern strategies of DNA synthesis have made it 
possible to recreate in principle all known viruses independent of natural
templates. We describe the first synthesis of a virus (poliovirus) in 2002 that
was accomplished outside living cells. We comment on the reaction of laypeople
and scientists to the work, which shaped the response to de novo syntheses of
other viruses. We discuss those viruses that have been synthesized since 2002,
among them viruses whose precise genome sequence had to be established by
painstakingly stitching together pieces of sequence information, and viruses
involved in zoonosis. Synthesizing viral genomes provides a powerful tool for
studying gene function and the pathogenic potential of these organisms. It also
allows modification of viral genomes to an extent hitherto unthinkable. Recoding 
of poliovirus and influenza virus to develop new vaccine candidates and
refactoring the phage T7 DNA genome are discussed as examples.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-micro-090110-102957 
PMID: 21756105  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Rev Med Virol. 2010 Nov;20(6):358-71. doi: 10.1002/rmv.663.

Mechanisms of genetic variation in polioviruses.

Savolainen-Kopra C(1), Blomqvist S.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Health and Welfare (THL), Department of Infectious
Disease Surveillance and Control, Unit of Intestinal Viruses, Helsinki, Finland. 
carita.savolainen-kopra@thl.fi

Polioviruses, as with all RNA viruses, are in a constant process of evolution
driven by different mechanisms. With multiple mechanisms for genetic variability,
they are successful conformists, adapting to changes in their habitat. The
evolution of polioviruses may occur with generation of point mutations followed
by genetic drift and selection. The mutation rate of polioviruses based on
several studies is approximately 3 × 10(-2) mutations/synonymous site/year in the
gene encoding viral protein 1. Genetic variation in polioviruses may also be
increased by sharing of genetic data of two different poliovirus lineages by
means of homologous recombination. According to the current view, recombination
is considered usually to occur by strand-switching, but a non-replicative model
has also been described. In recombination, polioviruses may either gain a set of 
advantageous mutations selected and fixed in previous generations of the parental
viruses or get rid of deleterious ones. The prerequisites and constraints of the 
evolution mechanisms will be discussed. Furthermore, consequences of poliovirus
evolution will be reviewed in the light of observations made on currently
circulating polioviruses. We will also describe how polioviruses strike back: as 
wild type polioviruses approach eradication, vaccine derived strains increase
their occurrence and genetic variability.

2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/rmv.663 
PMID: 20949639  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Virus Res. 2005 Aug;111(2):175-93.

Poliovirus and poliomyelitis: a tale of guts, brains, and an accidental event.

Mueller S(1), Wimmer E, Cello J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA.

Nearly 100 years after its discovery poliovirus remains one of most thoroughly
studied and best understood virus models for the molecular virologist. While
poliovirus has been of vital importance for our insight into picornavirus biology
at the cellular and biochemical level, it is ironic to note that, due to the
early success in defeating poliomyelitis in the developed world through
vaccination, many of the basic aspects of poliovirus pathogenesis remain poorly
understood. This is chiefly due to the lack of an adequate and affordable animal 
model, save of old world monkeys. Fundamental questions, such as the identity of 
the target cells during the enteric phase of infection, or mechanisms of systemic
spread are still unanswered. This review will attempt to summarize our current
knowledge of the molecular biology of poliovirus, its pathogenesis, as well as
recent advances in the areas of cell and tissue tropism and mechanisms of central
nervous system invasion.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2005.04.008 
PMID: 15885840  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Virol. 2003 Jun;77(11):6541-5.

Excretion of wild-type and vaccine-derived poliovirus in the feces of poliovirus 
receptor-transgenic mice.

Boot HJ(1), Kasteel DT, Buisman AM, Kimman TG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Vaccine-Preventable Diseases, National Institute for Public
Health and the Environment (RIVM), P.O. Box 1, 3720 BA Bilthoven, The
Netherlands. Hein.Boot@RIVM.NL

The emergence of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus (cVDPV) strains in
suboptimally vaccinated populations is a serious threat to the global poliovirus 
eradication. The genetic determinants for the transmissibility phenotype of
polioviruses, and in particularly of cVDPV strains, are currently unknown. Here
we describe the fecal excretion of wild-type poliovirus, oral polio vaccine, and 
cVDPV (Hispaniola) strains after intraperitoneal injection in poliovirus
receptor-transgenic mice. Both the pattern and the level of fecal excretion of
the cVDPV strains resemble those of wild-type poliovirus type 1. In contrast,
very little poliovirus was present in the feces after oral polio vaccine
administration. This mouse model will be helpful in elucidating the genetic
determinants for the high fecal-oral transmission phenotype of cVDPV strains.


PMCID: PMC155012
PMID: 12743311  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Jan 4;97(1):79-84.

Interaction of the poliovirus receptor with poliovirus.

He Y(1), Bowman VD, Mueller S, Bator CM, Bella J, Peng X, Baker TS, Wimmer E,
Kuhn RJ, Rossmann MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN
47907-1392, USA.

The structure of the extracellular, three-domain poliovirus receptor (CD155)
complexed with poliovirus (serotype 1) has been determined to 22-A resolution by 
means of cryo-electron microscopy and three-dimensional image-reconstruction
techniques. Density corresponding to the receptor was isolated in a difference
electron density map and fitted with known structures, homologous to those of the
three individual CD155 Ig-like domains. The fit was confirmed by the location of 
carbohydrate moieties in the CD155 glycoprotein, the conserved properties of
elbow angles in the structures of cell surface molecules with Ig-like folds, and 
the concordance with prior results of CD155 and poliovirus mutagenesis. CD155
binds in the poliovirus "canyon" and has a footprint similar to that of the
intercellular adhesion molecule-1 receptor on human rhinoviruses. However, the
orientation of the long, slender CD155 molecule relative to the poliovirus
surface is quite different from the orientation of intercellular adhesion
molecule-1 on rhinoviruses. In addition, the residues that provide specificity of
recognition differ for the two receptors. The principal feature of receptor
binding common to these two picornaviruses is the site in the canyon at which
binding occurs. This site may be a trigger for initiation of the subsequent
uncoating step required for viral infection.


PMCID: PMC26619
PMID: 10618374  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Biologicals. 1993 Dec;21(4):379-84.

Evolution and polymorphism of poliovirus genomes.

Crainic R(1), Kew O.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

The three poliovirus serotypes are very stable. Breakthrough of the serotype
barrier has never been observed in the natural evolution of poliovirus. This
serotype stability contrasts with the high level of genomic and phenotypic
variability that occurs within the bounds of serotype. The efficient control of
poliomyelitis by immunization is based upon type-specific immunity and serotype
stability. The development of attenuated strains by Albert Sabin was possible
because of the high variability of poliovirus genomes. The three Sabin strains,
one for each serotype, were selected as variants of non-attenuated wild
polioviruses, and each represents a unique poliovirus genotype. A consequence of 
poliovirus variability is the polymorphic character of its genome. This
polymorphism makes possible the identification of poliovirus genotypes upon which
studies on poliovirus evolution, virologic surveillance, and poliomyelitis
diagnostics are based. The antigenic and genomic peculiarities of the Sabin
strains are used to distinguish them from wild polioviruses among field isolates.
The mechanisms of poliovirus variation and their significance to the evolution of
both wild and vaccine poliovirus strains are the subjects of this article. The
natural evolution of polioviruses is discussed in the context of the global
initiative to eradicate poliomyelitis, which relies on the worldwide use of
Sabin's vaccine.

DOI: 10.1006/biol.1993.1099 
PMID: 8024754  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Biologicals. 1993 Dec;21(4):305-9.

The discovery of the enteroviruses and the classification of poliovirus among
them.

Melnick JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Virology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.

The history of the enteroviruses is described, and how poliovirus came to be
recognized as the prototype species of the genus, a subdivision of the family
Picornaviridae. Albert Sabin was one of the main contributors. He isolated
several enterovirus types and established them as causative agents of human
disease. The enteroviruses were discovered only after new methods were introduced
for working with viruses. They are now recognized as constituting one of the
genera of the picornavirus family. Pico-rna-virus stands for viruses which are
small (pico), and have an RNA genome. The enterovirus genus includes the
polioviruses, the coxsackieviruses and the echoviruses of humans, plus a number
of enteroviruses of lower animals (e.g., monkeys, cattle, pigs, mice). Over 100
serotypes are now recognized, the first having been the polioviruses.

DOI: 10.1006/biol.1993.1088 
PMID: 8024744  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Bioessays. 1989 Nov;11(5):128-32.

Poliovirus translation: a paradigm for a novel initiation mechanism.

Sonenberg N, Pelletier J.

All eukaryotic cellular mRNAs, and most viral mRNAs, are blocked at their 5' ends
with a cap structure (m7GpppX, where X is any nucleotide). Poliovirus, along with
a small number of other animal and plant viral mRNAs, does not contain a 5' cap
structure. Since the cap structure functions to facilitate ribosome binding to
mRNA, translation of polio-virus must proceed by a cap-independent mechanism.
Consistent with this, recent studies have shown that ribosomes can bind to an
internal region within the long 5' noncoding sequence of poliovirus RNA. Possible
mechanisms for cap-independent translation are discussed. Cap-independent
translation of poliovirus RNA is of major importance to the mechanism of shut-off
of host protein synthesis after infection. Moreover, it is likely to play a role 
in determining poliovirus neurovirulence and attenuation.

DOI: 10.1002/bies.950110504 
PMID: 2556117  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Virol Methods. 1987 Oct;18(1):25-36.

Intratypic differentiation of poliovirus strains by enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA): poliovirus type 2 and poliovirus type 3.

Glikmann G(1), Pedersen M, Petersen I.

Author information: 
(1)Ornithosis Department, Statens Seruminstitut, Copenhagen, Denmark.

A double-antibody sandwich ELISA was developed for the detection of antigenic
differences between wild and vaccine-derived strains of poliovirus type 2 and
poliovirus type 3. Antibodies were prepared in rabbits by immunization with
purified antigens of vaccine strains (type 2: Sabin P712, and type 3: Sabin Leon)
and wild type strains (type 2: MEF, and type 3: Pool 30). Immunoblotting analysis
of all antisera demonstrated that the IgG antibodies raised in rabbits have
specificity towards the main structural proteins (Vp1, Vp2 and Vp3) of
poliovirus. IgG fractions were purified from antisera by affinity chromatography,
on a protein A-activated Sepharose 4B column. Purified IgG antibodies were used
for coating of microtest plates (catching antibodies). The same reagents labelled
with horseradish peroxidase were used as conjugates, after cross-adsorption with 
antigens of the same type heterologous virus strains (strain-specific
conjugates). 29 poliovirus type 2 strains and 73 poliovirus type 3 strains
isolated from clinical samples, were differentiated intratypically, as
vaccine-derived or wild types, no intermediate strains were found and all samples
tested fell in two distinct (vaccine/wild) categories. As little as 40 ng of
poliovirus antigens was detected in stool samples from healthy children or from
polio patients cultivated in monkey kidney tissue cultures. Preparation of strain
specific conjugates did not require large amounts of poliovirus antigens. The
developed ELISA, which is economic and capable of (1) detection of low amounts of
poliovirus antigens in cultivated clinical samples, and (2) intratypic
differentiation of poliovirus antigens as either vaccine-derived or wild type, is
therefore well suited for large scale screening of poliovirus isolates.


PMID: 2826518  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

