

1008. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 Nov;94(47):e2069. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000002069.

Human Papillomavirus Infections are Common and Predict Mortality in a
Retrospective Cohort Study of Taiwanese Patients With Oral Cavity Cancer.

Lee LA(1), Huang CG, Tsao KC, Liao CT, Kang CJ, Chang KP, Huang SF, Chen IH, Fang
TJ, Li HY, Yang SL, Lee LY, Hsueh C, Lin CY, Fan KH, Chang TC, Wang HM, Ng SH,
Yen TC.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Head and
Neck Oncology Group (LAL, CTL, CJK, KPC, SFH, IHC, TJF, HYL); Department of
Laboratory Medicine, Linkou-Chang Gung Memorial Hospital (CGH, KCT, SLY);
Department of Medical Biotechnology and Laboratory Science, Graduate Institute of
Biomedical Sciences, Chang Gung University (CGH, KCT, SLY); Department of
Pathology (LYL, CH); Department of Radiation Oncology (CYL, KHF, TCC); Department
of Medical Oncology (HMW); Department of Diagnostic Radiology (SHN); and
Department of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging Center, Head and Neck
Oncology Group, Linkou-Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung University,
Taoyuan, Taiwan, Republic of China (TCY).

Human papillomavirus (HPV) infections are deemed to play a role in the
pathogenesis of oral cavity cancer (OCC). However, their exact prevalence and
clinical significance remain unclear. Herein, we investigated the prevalence and 
prognostic value of HPV infections in a large sample of Taiwanese OCC
patients.This study was designed as a retrospective cohort study. Between 2004
and 2011, we identified 1002 consecutive patients with newly diagnosed OCC who
were scheduled for standard treatment. HPV genotyping was performed in tumor
specimens using polymerase chain reaction-based HPV blots. To investigate the
temporal trends of HPV infections and their impact on 5-year overall survival
(OS), patients were divided into 2 cohorts according to calendar periods: "2004
cohort" (2004-2007; n = 466) and "2008 cohort" (2008-2011; n = 536). Univariate
and multivariate Cox regression models were also used to identify the independent
predictors of OS in the 2 cohorts. A weighted risk score was assigned to each
factor based on the range of their corresponding hazard ratios and validated in
both cohorts using the c-statistic.The overall prevalence of HPV infections was
19%, with a trend toward decreasing rates from 2004 to 2011. In patients without 
risky oral habits, the 5-year OS rate of HPV-positive patients was significantly 
lower than that of HPV-negative cases (49% vs 80%; P = 0.021). In the 2004
cohort, multivariate analysis identified HPV16, pathological T3/T4, pathological 
N1/N2, and extracapsular spread as independent adverse prognostic factors for OS.
In the 2008 cohort, pathological N1/N2, pathological stage III/IV, and
histological tumor depth >8 mm were identified as independent adverse prognostic 
factors. Using a weighted grading system incorporating HPV16 infection, we
devised a prognostic index that identified 4 distinct risk categories with 5-year
OS rates ranging from 25% to 89% (c-statistic = 0.76) in the 2004 cohort. The
validity of the index was internally confirmed in the 2008 cohort (c-statistic = 
0.71).We conclude that HPV infections are common in Taiwanese OCC patients and
predict 5-year OS. If independently validated, our composite prognostic score
comprising HPV16 infection may be useful for allocating OCC patients to
risk-adapted therapies.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000002069 
PMCID: PMC5058981
PMID: 26632712  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
