
Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


1009. Int J Cancer. 2016 Jul 15;139(2):373-82. doi: 10.1002/ijc.30081. Epub 2016 Mar
30.

Characterization of functionally active gene fusions in human papillomavirus
related oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma.

Guo T(1), Gaykalova DA(1), Considine M(2), Wheelan S(2), Pallavajjala A(2),
Bishop JA(3), Westra WH(3), Ideker T(4), Koch WM(1), Khan Z(1), Fertig EJ(2),
Califano JA(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions, Baltimore, MD.
(2)Division of Oncology Biostatistics, Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins
Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD.
(3)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA.
(5)Division of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Department of Surgery,
Moores Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego, CA.

The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) sequencing analysis of head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) recently reported on gene fusions, however, few human
papillomavirus (HPV) positive samples were included, and the functional relevance
of identified fusions was not explored. We therefore performed an independent
analysis of gene fusions in HPV-positive oropharyngeal SCC (OPSCC). RNA
sequencing was performed on 47 HPV-positive OPSCC primary tumors and 25 normal
mucosal samples from cancer unaffected controls on an Illumina TruSeq platform.
MapSplice2 was used for alignment and identification of fusion candidates.
Putative fusions with less than five spanning reads, detected in normal tissues, 
or that mapped to the same gene were filtered out. Selected fusions were
validated by RT-PCR and Sanger sequencing. Within 47 HPV-positive OPSCC tumors,
282 gene fusions were identified. Most fusions (85.1%) occurred in a single
tumor, and the remaining fusions recurred in 2-16 tumors. Gene fusions were
associated with significant up regulation of 16 genes (including EGFR and ERBB4) 
and down regulation of four genes (PTPRT, ZNF750, DLG2, SLCO5A1). Expression of
these genes followed similar patterns of up regulation and down regulation in
tumors without these fusions compared to normal tissue. Five of six gene fusions 
selected for validation were confirmed through RT-PCR and sequencing. This
integrative analysis provides a method of prioritizing functionally relevant gene
fusions that may be expanded to other tumor types. These results demonstrate that
gene fusions may be one mechanism by which functionally relevant genes are
altered in HPV-positive OPSCC.

Â© 2016 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.30081 
PMCID: PMC5579720
PMID: 26949921  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
