

1011. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 Dec;39(12):1643-52. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000516.

Performance of a Branch Chain RNA In Situ Hybridization Assay for the Detection
of High-risk Human Papillomavirus in Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma.

Kerr DA(1), Arora KS, Mahadevan KK, Hornick JL, Krane JF, Rivera MN, Ting DT,
Deshpande V, Faquin WC.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology ‡Surgery ∥Tucker Gosnell Center for Gastrointestinal
Cancers, Massachusetts General Hospital §Department of Pathology, Brigham and
Women's Hospital †Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.

High-risk human papillomavirus (HR-HPV) is a major etiologic agent in a subset of
head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs), and its recognition has
prognostic and predictive implications. The availability of a sensitive and
specific test to assess HR-HPV status is limited. We evaluate an RNA in situ
hybridization (ISH) method using branch chain technology to detect HR-HPV and
compare its results with DNA ISH, p16 immunohistochemistry, and polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR). Tissue sections from 54 patients were stained with a manual RNA
ISH assay (ViewRNA), which detects 14 HR-HPV types, an automated DNA ISH assay,
and p16 immunohistochemistry. Most cases (83%, n=45) were also tested on an
automated platform for 14 HR-HPV types and 1 limited to HPV 16/18. PCR was
performed in all cases and was successful in 93% (n=50). The RNA ISH assay
produced results in 96% of the cases with strong signals and was easily
interpreted. HR-HPV was detected in more cases (63%, n=34) by RNA ISH than by DNA
ISH (39%, n=21). Compared with PCR, both ISH platforms were 94% specific. RNA ISH
was more sensitive (91%) than DNA ISH (65%), and RNA ISH correlated more strongly
with p16 immunostaining. HPV 16 represented 89% of HR-HPV detected. The cocktail 
HPV 16/18 platform was concordant with the pooled HR-HPV assay in all expected
cases. The automated assay demonstrated high concordance (96%) with the manual
version, showed decreased background, and should allow for easy implementation
into the workflow of the diagnostic pathology laboratory.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000516 
PMID: 26426378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
