

1015. Oncol Rep. 2013 Dec;30(6):2811-9. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2750. Epub 2013 Sep 20.

Associations of TP53 mutations, codon 72 polymorphism and human papillomavirus in
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma patients.

Shi Q(1), Xiao K, Wei W, Zhang BY, Chen C, Xu Y, Chen LN, Song YT, Ma X, Zhang
NS, Dong XP.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Infectious Disease Prevention and Control,
Collaborative Innovation Center of Infectious Disease, National Institute for
Viral Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for Disease Control and
Prevention, Beijing 102206, P.R. China.

To investigate the possible associations between mutations in TP53 and phenotypes
of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in codon 72 (SNP72) with the expression
profiles of p53 and human papillomavirus (HPV) infection, 93 pathologically
diagnosed head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs) were included for
study. Using PCR and direct sequencing, 45 TP53 mutations in 35 cases (37.6%)
were confirmed out of the 93 HNSCCs. P53 immunohistochemistry (IHC) confirmed 34 
(36.6%) cases with positive staining, including 22 cases with strong and 12 with 
weak positivity. IARC database and software analysis showed similar results that 
most of the mutated p53 proteins lost their normal function. Further statistical 
analysis found a negative correlation between p53 IHC and HPV IHC in the tissues 
from the group of other HNSCCs (of various sites other than the larynx) but not
in the tissues from the laryngeal carcinomas. Analyses of SNP72 showed that the
patients with the Arg phenotype had a significantly older age at disease onset
when compared to patients with the Pro phenotype, particularly in the group of
other HNSCCs. In addition, all cases with strong staining for p53 in the
laryngeal carcinoma group had the Pro phenotype and all tumors with poor
pathological differentiation in the group of other HNSCCs had the Pro phenotype. 
These data indicate that the profiles of TP53 mutations, SNP72 polymorphism, p53 
IHC and HPV E6 IHC are distinct between the groups of laryngeal carcinoma and
other HNSCCs.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2013.2750 
PMID: 24064928  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
