

1017. Oncol Rep. 2017 Aug;38(2):908-916. doi: 10.3892/or.2017.5720. Epub 2017 Jun 14.

Expression of cell cycle-related proteins in oropharyngeal squamous cell
carcinoma based on human papilloma virus status.

Tsuchida K(1), Sugai T(1), Uesugi N(1), Ishida K(1), Matsuura K(2), Sato I(3),
Shiga K(4), Sato H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Diagnostic Pathology, School of Medicine, Iwate
Medical University, Morioka, Iwate 020-8505, Japan.
(2)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Miyagi Cancer Center, Natori, Miyagi
981-1293, Japan.
(3)Department of Pathology, Miyagi Cancer Center, Natori, Miyagi 981-1293, Japan.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, School of Medicine, Iwate 
Medical University, Morioka, Iwate 020-8505, Japan.

The molecular association between human papilloma virus (HPV) and cell
cycle-related (CCR) proteins is not fully understood in oropharyngeal squamous
cell carcinoma (OPSCC). Herein, we examined the expression levels of CCRs in
OPSCCs based on HPV status. In situ hybridization (ISH)- and polymerase chain
reaction (PCR)-based assays were used to detect HPV status in 98 OPSCCs, and CCRs
were detected by immunostaining. Of 98 tumors, 47 had HPV-positive tumors by
either ISH- or PCR-based assays. Concordance analysis between ISH- and PCR-based 
tests showed a good agreement in OPSCC. Expression of p16 was moderate,
consistent with HPV positivity as determined by ISH-based analysis. High p53-,
phospho (p)-Rb-, SKP2-, cyclin D1-, and p-c-myc-positive rates were correlated
with HPV-negative tumors, whereas high p16- and p27-positive rates were
associated with HPV-positive tumors. The positive rates for p21 and cyclin A did 
not differ between HPV-positive and HPV-negative tumors. Finally, Ki-67
positivity was commonly observed for both types of OPSCCs. Although expression of
p16 is thought to be a marker of HPV infection, ISH- or PCR-based tests should be
used for HPV detection. In addition, our results regarding CCRs may be helpful
for understanding the carcinogenesis of OPSCC.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2017.5720 
PMID: 28627689  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
