

1018. Pathol Res Pract. 2013 May;209(5):291-5. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2013.02.011. Epub
2013 Mar 7.

Assessing oral brushing technique as a source to collect DNA and its use in
detecting human papillomavirus.

Marques AE(1), Fernandes LP, Cantarutti AL, Oyama CN, Figueiredo PT, Guerra EN.

Author information: 
(1)Oral Histopathology Laboratory, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of
Brasilia, Brazil.

Collecting buccal cell DNA has a number of advantages in terms of practicality
and technical quality when employed for detecting human papillomavirus (HPV),
arguably an important etiological factor for head and neck carcinomas. The
objective of the present study was to assess oropharyngeal mucosa brushing as an 
effective method for collecting DNA samples and for detecting HPV. Forty-three
female patients diagnosed with cervical intraepithelial neoplasia, and 21 of
their spouses, both groups without clinically detectable oral lesions, were
submitted to quantitative and qualitative DNA analysis obtained through buccal
cell brushing, with spectrophotometry assessment and beta-globin PCR. DNA samples
were also checked for the presence of HPV. Efficient collection of DNA was
achieved in all the sample cases. Two samples, a male and a female (not sexual
partners), showed HPV-positivity. The results revealed that the oral brushing
technique is an effective method for DNA collection to detect HPV, confirming
that it could usefully contribute to epidemiological studies undertaken in
Brazil's Public Health System. HPV detection using PCR showed that only 3.12% of 
the cases were HPV-positive. Although the sample was small, our study
nevertheless allowed the detection of HPV in DNA samples of oral biological
material.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prp.2013.02.011 
PMID: 23557864  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
