

1022. Mol Cancer Res. 2016 Oct;14(10):941-952. Epub 2016 Jul 15.

Genomic Integration of High-Risk HPV Alters Gene Expression in Oropharyngeal
Squamous Cell Carcinoma.

Walline HM(1), Komarck CM(2), McHugh JB(3), Bellile EL(4), Brenner JC(2), Prince 
ME(2), McKean EL(2), Chepeha DB(2), Wolf GT(2), Worden FP(5), Bradford CR(2),
Carey TE(6).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Program, Program in the Biomedical Sciences, Rackham Graduate
School, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan. Department of
Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(4)Biostatistics, University of Michigan Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Clinical Oncology, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(6)Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan. careyte@med.umich.edu.

High-risk HPV (hrHPV) is the leading etiologic factor in oropharyngeal cancer.
HPV-positive oropharyngeal tumors generally respond well to therapy, with
complete recovery in approximately 80% of patients. However, it remains unclear
why some patients are nonresponsive to treatment, with 20% of patients recurring 
within 5 years. In this study, viral factors were examined for possible clues to 
differences in tumor behavior. Oropharynx tumors that responded well to therapy
were compared with those that persisted and recurred. Viral oncogene alternate
transcripts were assessed, and cellular sites of viral integration were mapped
and sequenced. Effects of integration on gene expression were assessed by
transcript analysis at the integration sites. All of the tumors demonstrated
active viral oncogenesis, indicated by expression of HPV E6 and E7 oncogenes and 
alternate E6 splicing. In the responsive tumors, HPV integration occurred
exclusively in intergenic chromosome regions, except for one tumor with viral
integration into TP63. Each recurrent tumor exhibited complex HPV integration
patterns into cancer-associated genes, including TNFRSF13B, SCN2A, SH2B1, UBE2V2,
SMOC1, NFIA, and SEMA6D Disrupted cellular transcripts were identified in the
region of integration in four of the seven affected genes.IMPLICATIONS:
Integration of transcriptionally active hrHPV into cellular intergenic regions
associates with tumor behavior by altering gene expression. Mol Cancer Res;
14(10); 941-52. ©2016 AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-16-0105 
PMCID: PMC5065754
PMID: 27422711  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
