

1030. Medicine (Baltimore). 2019 Feb;98(7):e14436. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000014436.

The association between human papillomavirus infection and head and neck cancer: 
A population-based cohort study.

Tsai SC(1), Huang JY(2), Lin C(3), Liaw YP(2), Lin FC(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Tungs' Taichung MetroHarbor Hospital, Wuchi.
(2)Department of Public Health and Institute of Public Health, Chung Shan Medical
University.
(3)Department of Medical Research, Tungs' Taichung MetroHarbor Hospital, Wuchi.
(4)School of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University.
(5)Department of Surgery, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) has been linked with development of oropharyngeal
squamous cell carcinoma, a subset of head and neck cancer (HNC). This study aimed
to evaluate the association between HPV infection and subsequent development of
HNC and to report epidemiological information in Taiwan.This population-based
cohort study retrieved patient data from the longitudinal health insurance
database (LHID) of Taiwan's National Health Insurance Research Database (NHIRD)
from 2005 to 2010 and analyzed it retrospectively. The crude incidence rate and
incidence rate ratios with 95% confidence intervals of HNC were estimated in
patients with and without HPV infection. A time-to-event analysis was conducted
and multiple regression analysis was performed to identify factors associated
with HNC in HPV-infected patients, including age at baseline, sex, and
comorbidities.This study included the data of 25,520 HPV-infected and 1,061,817
noninfected patients. The HPV-infected group had a significantly higher
proportion of females than the noninfected group (55.80% vs 50.66%, respectively;
P < .0001). The incidence rate of HNC was 11.49 (males) and 5.83 (females) per 10
person-months versus 11.38 (males) and 3.90 (females) per 10 person-months in the
infected and noninfected groups, respectively. HPV was significantly associated
with cancer in females (hazard ratio = 1.520, 95% confidence interval
1.166-1.981), but not in males (hazard ratio = 1.000, 95% confidence interval
0.815-1.228). No significant differences were found in age between the
HPV-infected and noninfected patients (49.20 ± 14.34 years vs 49.09 ± 13.82
years, respectively); and a slightly higher percentage of HPV-infected patients
had a specific comorbidity than did noninfected patients 12.54% versus 9.43%,
ischemic heart disease 14.22% versus 10.51%, hypertension 22.40% versus 19.54%,
liver disease 22.88% versus 16.17%, and renal disease 7.14% versus 5.39%,
respectively.Results of this study may help clinicians in the diagnosis,
prognosis, and treatment of head and neck cancer.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000014436 
PMID: 30762752  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
