

1031. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 26;7(4):4972-80. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6649.

Epstein-Barr virus mir-bart1-5p detection via nasopharyngeal brush sampling is
effective for diagnosing nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Zheng XH(1)(2), Lu LX(1), Cui C(1)(2), Chen MY(1), Li XZ(1)(2), Jia WH(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in
South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou
510060, China.
(2)Department of Experimental Research, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center,
Guangzhou 510060, China.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-encoded microRNAs (miRNAs) are highly expressed in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) cases in high-risk areas, and may be involved in
tumorigenesis. Using quantitative RT-PCR, we detected four EBV-encoded BamHI A
rightward transcript (BART) miRNAs (mir-bart1-5p, mir-bart5, mir-bart6-5p and
mir-bart17-5p) exclusively in 53 NPC biopsies as compared to 69 controls. In a
larger patient group, that included 215 NPC cases and 209 controls, significantly
higher levels of all four EBV miRNAs were detected in tumor cells harvested
directly from the nasopharynx using a less invasive nasopharyngeal (NP) brush
than in the controls (p < 0.001). One EBV miRNA, mir-bart1-5p, holds particular
promise for use as a diagnostic indicator of NPC (with 93.5% sensitivity and 100%
specificity), and its relative expression level was reflective of disease
progression. Detection of this miRNA was effective for diagnosing early-stage
NPC, even in cases that were falsely diagnosed as negative based on
histopathological analysis, plasma EBV DNA load, and VCA-IgA and EA-IgA titers.
EBV-encoded mir-bart1-5p detection via NP brush sampling could act as an
efficient and less invasive method assisting clinical diagnosis of NPC.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.6649 
PMCID: PMC4826258
PMID: 26701721  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
