

1032. Infect Genet Evol. 2016 Sep;43:94-100. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2016.05.020. Epub
2016 May 16.

Phylogenetic and functional analysis of sequence variation of human
papillomavirus type 31 E6 and E7 oncoproteins.

Ferenczi A(1), Gyöngyösi E(1), Szalmás A(1), László B(1), Kónya J(1), Veress
G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Debrecen, Nagyerdei krt. 98, H-4032 Debrecen, Hungary.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Debrecen, Nagyerdei krt. 98, H-4032 Debrecen, Hungary. Electronic address:
veregy@med.unideb.hu.

High-risk human papillomaviruses (HPV) are the causative agents of cervical and
other anogenital cancers as well as a subset of head and neck cancers. The E6 and
E7 oncoproteins of HPV contribute to oncogenesis by associating with the tumour
suppressor protein p53 and pRb, respectively. For HPV types 16 and 18, intratypic
sequence variation was shown to have biological and clinical significance. The
functional significance of sequence variation among HPV 31 variants was studied
less intensively. HPV 31 variants belonging to different variant lineages were
found to have differences in persistence and in the ability to cause high grade
cervical intraepithelial neoplasia. In the present study, we started to explore
the functional effects of natural sequence variation of HPV 31 E6 and E7
oncoproteins. The E6 variants were tested for their effects on p53 protein
stability and transcriptional activity, while the E7 variants were tested for
their effects on pRb protein level and also on the transcriptional activity of
E2F transcription factors. HPV 31 E7 variants displayed uniform effects on pRb
stability and also on the activity of E2F transcription factors. HPV 31 E6
variants had remarkable differences in the ability to inhibit the
trans-activation function of p53 but not in the ability to induce the in vivo
degradation of p53. Our results indicate that natural sequence variation of the
HPV 31 E6 protein may be involved in the observed differences in the oncogenic
potential between HPV 31 variants.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2016.05.020 
PMID: 27197052  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
