

1034. Oncotarget. 2015 Jan 20;6(2):953-68.

EphrinB1: novel microtubule associated protein whose expression affects taxane
sensitivity.

Colbert PL(1), Vermeer DW(1), Wieking BG(1), Lee JH(1), Vermeer PD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Research Center, Sanford Research, Sioux Falls, South Dakota,
USA.

Microtubules (MTs) are components of the cytoskeleton made up of polymerized
alpha and beta tubulin dimers. MT structure and function must be maintained
throughout the cell cycle to ensure proper execution of mitosis and cellular
homeostasis. The protein tyrosine phosphatase, PTPN13, localizes to distinct
compartments during mitosis and cytokinesis. We have previously demonstrated that
the HPV16 E6 oncoprotein binds PTPN13 and leads to its degradation. Thus, we
speculated that HPV infection may affect cellular proliferation by altering the
localization of a PTPN13 phosphatase substrate, EphrinB1, during mitosis. Here we
report that EphrinB1 co-localizes with MTs during all phases of the cell cycle.
Specifically, a cleaved, unphosphorylated EphrinB1 fragment directly binds
tubulin, while its phosphorylated form lacks MT binding capacity. These findings 
suggest that EphrinB1 is a novel microtubule associated protein (MAP).
Importantly, we show that in the context of HPV16 E6 expression, EphrinB1 affects
taxane response in vitro. We speculate that this reflects PTPN13's modulation of 
EphrinB1 phosphorylation and suggest that EphrinB1 is an important contributor to
taxane sensitivity/resistance phenotypes in epithelial cancers. Thus, HPV
infection or functional mutations of PTPN13 in non-viral cancers may predict
taxane sensitivity.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.2823 
PMCID: PMC4359267
PMID: 25436983  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
