

1035. Int J Epidemiol. 2011 Apr;40(2):489-502. doi: 10.1093/ije/dyq249. Epub 2011 Jan
11.

Low human papillomavirus prevalence in head and neck cancer: results from two
large case-control studies in high-incidence regions.

Ribeiro KB(1), Levi JE, Pawlita M, Koifman S, Matos E, Eluf-Neto J, Wunsch-Filho 
V, Curado MP, Shangina O, Zaridze D, Szeszenia-Dabrowska N, Lissowska J, Daudt A,
Menezes A, Bencko V, Mates D, Fernandez L, Fabianova E, Gheit T, Tommasino M,
Boffetta P, Brennan P, Waterboer T.

Author information: 
(1)International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies support an important role for human papillomavirus
(HPV) in a subgroup of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC). We have
evaluated the HPV deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) prevalence as well as the
association between serological response to HPV infection and HNSCC in two
distinct populations from Central Europe (CE) and Latin America (LA).
METHODS: Cases (n = 2214) and controls (n = 3319) were recruited from 1998 to
2003, using a similar protocol including questionnaire and blood sample
collection. Tumour DNA from 196 fresh tissue biopsies was analysed for multiple
HPV types followed by an HPV type-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
protocol towards the E7 gene from HPV 16. Using multiplex serology, serum samples
were analysed for antibodies to 17 HPV types. Statistical analysis included the
estimation of adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and the respective 95% confidence
intervals (CIs).
RESULTS: HPV16 E7 DNA prevalence among cases was 3.1% (6/196), including 4.4% in 
the oropharynx (3/68), 3.8% in the hypopharynx/larynx (3/78) and 0% among 50
cases of oral cavity carcinomas. Positivity for both HPV16 E6 and E7 antibodies
was associated with a very high risk of oropharyngeal cancer (OR = 179, 95% CI
35.8-899) and hypopharyngeal/laryngeal cancer (OR = 14.9, 95% CI 2.92-76.1).
CONCLUSIONS: A very low prevalence of HPV DNA and serum antibodies was observed
among cases in both CE and LA. The proportion of head and neck cancer caused by
HPV may vary substantially between different geographical regions and studies
that are designed to evaluate the impact of HPV vaccination on HNSCC need to
consider this heterogeneity.

DOI: 10.1093/ije/dyq249 
PMID: 21224273  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
