
Conflict of interest statement: There is no conflict of interest.


1037. Int J Oral Sci. 2015 Mar 23;7(1):18-22. doi: 10.1038/ijos.2014.28.

Expression of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A 16, tumour protein 53 and
epidermal growth factor receptor in salivary gland carcinomas is not associated
with oncogenic virus infection.

Senft E(1), Lemound J(2), Stucki-Koch A(1), Gellrich NC(2), Kreipe H(1), Hussein 
K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Hannover Medical School (MHH), Hannover, Germany.
(2)Department of Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Surgery, Hannover Medical School (MHH),
Hannover, Germany.

It is known that human papillomavirus (HPV) infection can cause squamous cell
neoplasms at several sites, such as cervix uteri carcinoma and oral squamous
carcinoma. There is little information on the expression of HPV and its
predictive markers in tumours of the major and minor salivary glands of the head 
and neck. We therefore assessed oral salivary gland neoplasms to identify
associations between HPV and infection-related epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR), cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A (CDKN2A/p16) and tumour protein p53 
(TP53). Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue samples from oral salivary gland
carcinomas (n=51) and benign tumours (n=26) were analysed by polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) analysis for several HPV species, including high-risk types 16 and
18. Evaluation of EGFR, CDKN2A, TP53 and cytomegalovirus (CMV) was performed by
immunohistochemistry. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) was evaluated by EBV-encoded RNA
in situ hybridisation. We demonstrated that salivary gland tumours are not
associated with HPV infection. The expression of EGFR, CDKN2A and TP53 may be
associated with tumour pathology but is not induced by HPV. CMV and EBV were not 
detectable. In contrast to oral squamous cell carcinomas, HPV, CMV and EBV
infections are not associated with malignant or benign neoplastic lesions of the 
salivary glands.

DOI: 10.1038/ijos.2014.28 
PMCID: PMC4817540
PMID: 25012870  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
