

104. Vaccine. 2017 Dec 4;35(48 Pt B):6691-6699. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.10.018.
Epub 2017 Oct 25.

The M2 protein of live, attenuated influenza vaccine encodes a mutation that
reduces replication in human nasal epithelial cells.

Wohlgemuth N(1), Ye Y(1), Fenstermacher KJ(1), Liu H(1), Lane AP(2), Pekosz A(3).

Author information: 
(1)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, The
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins Outpatient
Center, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, The
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD, USA; Department
of Environmental Health Sciences, The Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public
Health, Baltimore, MD, USA. Electronic address: apekosz1@jhu.edu.

The influenza A virus components of the live, attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV)
encode the HA and NA gene segments from a circulating virus strain and the
remaining gene segments from the cold-adapted master donor virus, A/Ann
Arbor/6/1960 (H2N2). The master donor virus imparts at least three phenotypes:
temperature-sensitivity (ts), attenuation (att), and cold-adaption (ca). The
genetic loci responsible for the att and ts phenotypes of LAIV were mapped to
PB1, PB2, and NP by reverse genetics experiments using immortalized cell lines.
However, some in vivo studies have demonstrated that the M segment, which
acquired an alanine (Ala) to serine (Ser) mutation at M2 position 86 during cold 
adaption - a mutation found in no other influenza A virus strain - contributes to
the att phenotype. Prior studies have shown this region of the M2 cytoplasmic
tail to be critical for influenza virus replication. Using reverse genetics, we
demonstrate that certain amino acid substitutions at M2 positions 83 and 86 alter
the replication of influenza A/Udorn/307/72 (H3N2). Importantly, substitution of 
a Ser at M2 position 86 reduces A/Udorn/307/72 replication in differentiated
primary human nasal epithelial cell (hNECs) cultures, but does not considerably
affect replication in MDCK cells. When a Ser was substituted for Ala at M2 86 in 
LAIV, the virus replicated to higher titers and with faster kinetics in hNEC
cultures, implicating this amino acid change as contributing to LAIV attenuation.
Increased replication also resulted in increased production of IFN-λ. These data 
indicate the LAIV associated Ser mutation at M2 position 86 contributes to the
att phenotype and is associated with a differential regulation of interferon in
LAIV infection.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.10.018 
PMCID: PMC5696008
PMID: 29079099  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
