

1040. Cancer Causes Control. 2017 Jun;28(6):635-645. doi: 10.1007/s10552-017-0889-8.
Epub 2017 Apr 8.

Evolving disparities in the epidemiology of oral cavity and oropharyngeal
cancers.

Javadi P(1), Sharma A(1), Zahnd WE(2), Jenkins WD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Southern Illinois University
School of Medicine, Springfield, USA.
(2)Population Health Science Program, Southern Illinois University School of
Medicine, 201 E. Madison St., Springfield, IL, 62794-9664, USA.
(3)Population Health Science Program, Southern Illinois University School of
Medicine, 201 E. Madison St., Springfield, IL, 62794-9664, USA.
wjenkins@siumed.edu.

Incidence rates of head and neck cancers (HNC) associated with human
papillomavirus (HPVa) infection are increasing while non-HPV-associated
(non-HPVa) HNC cancer rates are decreasing. As nearly all sexually active
individuals will acquire an HPV infection, it is important to understand
epidemiologic trends of HNCs associated with this sexually transmitted disease.
We analyzed SEER 9 (1973-2012) and 18 data (2000-2012) for HPVa HNCs (oropharynx 
area; OP) and non-HPVa (oral cavity area; OC). Incidence rates were examined by
gender, race, rurality, geographic location, and time. Joinpoint regression
analyses assessed temporal variations. From 1973 to 2012, OC incidence decreased 
while OP increased, with changes largely driven by males (whose OP rate increased
106.2% vs female decrease of 10.3%). Males consistently had higher rates of both 
cancer groups across each registry except Alaska, OP rates among blacks changed
from significantly above whites to below, and trend analysis indicated
significant differences in rates over time by gender, race, and geography.
Analysis of SEER 18 found that rates discordantly varied by group and gender
across the 18 registries, as did the male/female rate ratio with overall means of
4.7 for OP versus 1.7 for OC (only Alaska and Georgia having overlapping ranges).
Our findings indicate that much of the HPVa rate increases were driven by rate
increases among males and that there were changing differences in risk between
genders, race, and geographic location. The epidemiology of HNCs is complex, with
locally relevant factors requiring further research for elucidation of
demographic disparities in incidence.

DOI: 10.1007/s10552-017-0889-8 
PMID: 28391376  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
