

1044. Clin Cancer Res. 2010 Apr 1;16(7):2055-64. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-2424.
Epub 2010 Mar 16.

Viral response to chemotherapy in endemic burkitt lymphoma.

Tang W(1), Harmon P, Gulley ML, Mwansambo C, Kazembe PN, Martinson F, Wokocha C, 
Kenney SC, Hoffman I, Sigel C, Maygarden S, Hoffman M, Shores C.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Otolaryngology/Head and Neck
Surgery, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7525,
USA.

PURPOSE: Some EBV-directed therapies are predicted to be effective only when
lytic viral replication occurs. We studied whether cyclophosphamide chemotherapy 
induces EBV to switch from latent to lytic phases of infection in a series of
EBV-associated Burkitt lymphomas.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Children with first presentation of an expanding, solid
maxillary or mandibular mass consistent with Burkitt lymphoma underwent
fine-needle aspiration just prior to the initiation of cyclophosphamide therapy
and again 1 to 5 days later. Aspirated cells were examined for latent and lytic
EBV infection using in situ hybridization to EBV-encoded RNA (EBER),
immunohistochemical analysis of the lytic EBV proteins BZLF1 and BMRF1, reverse
transcription PCR targeting BZLF1 transcripts, and EBV viral load measurement by 
quantitative PCR.
RESULTS: Among 21 lymphomas expressing EBER prior to chemotherapy, 9 of 10 still 
expressed EBER on day 1 after therapy whereas only 2 of 11 (18%) specimens still 
expressed EBER at days 3 to 5, implying that chemotherapy was fairly effective at
eliminating latently infected cells. Neither of the lytic products, BZLF1 or
BMRF1, were significantly upregulated at the posttherapy time points examined.
However, EBV genomic copy number increased in 5 of 10 samples 1 day after
treatment began, suggesting that viral replication occurs within the first 24
hours.
CONCLUSION: Cyclophosphamide may induce the lytic phase of EBV infection and is
fairly effective in diminishing EBER-expressing tumor cells within 5 days. These 
findings provide the rationale for a trial testing synergistic tumor cell killing
using cyclophosphamide with a drug like ganciclovir targeting lytically infected 
cells.

Copyright 2010 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-2424 
PMCID: PMC2848899
PMID: 20233888  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
