

1048. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2016 Dec;273(12):4549-4559. doi:
10.1007/s00405-016-4152-9. Epub 2016 Jun 24.

Prevalence of human papillomavirus in oral squamous cell carcinomas in northern
Spain.

Rodríguez-Santamarta T(1), Rodrigo JP(2)(3), García-Pedrero JM(3),
Álvarez-Teijeiro S(3), Ángeles Villaronga M(3), Suárez-Fernández L(3),
Alvarez-Argüelles ME(4), Astudillo A(5), de Vicente JC(6)(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Hospital Universitario Central
de Asturias (HUCA), C/Carretera de Rubín, s/n, 33011, Oviedo, Asturias, Spain.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias
(HUCA), C/Carretera de Rubín, s/n, 33011, Oviedo, Asturias, Spain.
(3)Instituto Universitario de Oncología del Principado de Asturias (IUOPA),
Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, Edificio Consultas Externas, Planta
Baja Lab 2 ORL-IUOPA, C/Celestino Villamil, s/n, 33006, Oviedo, Asturias, Spain.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias (HUCA),
C/Carretera de Rubín, s/n, 33011, Oviedo, Asturias, Spain.
(5)Department of Pathology, Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias (HUCA),
C/Carretera de Rubín, s/n, 33011, Oviedo, Asturias, Spain.
(6)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Hospital Universitario Central
de Asturias (HUCA), C/Carretera de Rubín, s/n, 33011, Oviedo, Asturias, Spain.
jvicente@uniovi.es.
(7)Instituto Universitario de Oncología del Principado de Asturias (IUOPA),
Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, Edificio Consultas Externas, Planta
Baja Lab 2 ORL-IUOPA, C/Celestino Villamil, s/n, 33006, Oviedo, Asturias, Spain. 
jvicente@uniovi.es.
(8)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Hospital Universitario Central
de Asturias, School of Medicine, c/Catedrático José Serrano s/n, 33006, Oviedo,
Spain. jvicente@uniovi.es.

The aim of this study was to analyze the prevalence of high-risk HPV in oral
squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) in a northern Spanish population, as well as to
ascertain the prognostic role of p16INK4a expression. The examination samples
were collected from paraffin tissue blocks, from 125 patients surgically treated 
between 1996 and 2007. All cases were histologically evaluated, and the presence 
of HPV was assessed by p16 and p53immunohistochemistry followed by DNA detection 
by in situ hybridization (ISH) and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification 
using the combination of consensus primers MY11/GP6 + . Fourteen cases (11 %)
were p16-immunopositive, and p53 was scored positive in 73 cases (58 %). Five
cases (4 %) showed a simultaneous p16-positive and p53-negative immunostaining.
ISH was negative in all the cases. Among the p16INK4a-immunopositive cases, PCR
amplification failed to reveal HPV DNA in any tumor samples. There were no
statistically significant differences in any clinical or pathological
characteristics of the patients regarding p16INK4a expression. T classification, 
neck-node metastasis, and clinical stage showed outcome relevance. However, no
significant differences in cause-specific survival based on p16INK4a were
observed. We did not find any high-risk HPV types in our patients, thus, are
unlikely that HPV has an important role in the etiology of OSCC. p16INK4a protein
was neither an accurate marker of HPV infection nor a prognosis marker in OSCC.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-016-4152-9 
PMID: 27342404  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
