

1051. BMC Infect Dis. 2011 Dec 14;11:346. doi: 10.1186/1471-2334-11-346.

An outbreak of coxsackievirus A6 hand, foot, and mouth disease associated with
onychomadesis in Taiwan, 2010.

Wei SH(1), Huang YP, Liu MC, Tsou TP, Lin HC, Lin TL, Tsai CY, Chao YN, Chang LY,
Hsu CM.

Author information: 
(1)Taiwan Centers for Disease Control, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: In 2010, an outbreak of coxsackievirus A6 (CA6) hand, foot and mouth 
disease (HFMD) occurred in Taiwan and some patients presented with onychomadesis 
and desquamation following HFMD. Therefore, we performed an epidemiological and
molecular investigation to elucidate the characteristics of this outbreak.
METHODS: Patients who had HFMD with positive enterovirus isolation results were
enrolled. We performed a telephone interview with enrolled patients or their
caregivers to collect information concerning symptoms, treatments, the presence
of desquamation, and the presence of nail abnormalities. The serotypes of the
enterovirus isolates were determined using indirect immunofluorescence assays.
The VP1 gene was sequenced and the phylogenetic tree for the current CA6 strains 
in 2010, 52 previous CA6 strains isolated in Taiwan from 1998 through 2009, along
with 8 reference sequences from other countries was constructed using the
neighbor-joining command in MEGA software.
RESULTS: Of the 130 patients with laboratory-confirmed CA6 infection, some
patients with CA6 infection also had eruptions around the perioral area (28,
22%), the trunk and/or the neck (39, 30%) and generalized skin eruptions (6, 5%) 
in addition to the typical presentation of skin eruptions on the hands, feet, and
mouths. Sixty-six (51%) CA6 patients experienced desquamation of palms and soles 
after the infection episode and 48 (37%) CA6 patients developed onychomadesis,
which only occurred in 7 (5%) of 145 cases with non-CA6 enterovirus infection (p 
< 0.001). The sequences of viral protein 1 of CA6 in 2010 differ from those found
in Taiwan before 2010, but are similar to those found in patients in Finland in
2008.
CONCLUSIONS: HFMD patients with CA6 infection experienced symptoms targeting a
broader spectrum of skin sites and more profound tissue destruction, i.e.,
desquamation and nail abnormalities.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2334-11-346 
PMCID: PMC3297538
PMID: 22168544  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
