

1057. Cancer Med. 2013 Dec;2(6):978-86. doi: 10.1002/cam4.155. Epub 2013 Nov 4.

Occupational dust exposure and head and neck squamous cell carcinoma risk in a
population-based case-control study conducted in the greater Boston area.

Langevin SM(1), McClean MD, Michaud DS, Eliot M, Nelson HH, Kelsey KT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio.

Head and neck cancers account for an estimated 549,000 global cancer diagnoses
each year. While tobacco use, alcohol consumption, and HPV16 infection are
considered to be the major risk factors for this disease, occupational risk
factors, including exposure to asbestos, have also been described, although dust 
exposures other than asbestos have been historically understudied. We have
investigated the relationship between occupational exposures to five types of
dusts, including sawdust, concrete dust, leather dust, metal dust, and chimney
soot, and head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) in the greater Boston
area. We report findings from a population-based case-control study involving 951
incident HNSCC cases and 1193 controls, frequency matched on age (±3 years), sex,
and town/neighborhood of residence. Multivariable logistic regression was used to
assess the association between occupational exposure to each type of dust and
HNSCC, overall and by primary tumor site. After adjusting for age, sex, race,
smoking, alcohol consumption, education, and HPV16 serology, laryngeal carcinoma 
risk increased for each decade of occupational exposure to sawdust (OR = 1.2, 95%
CI: 1.0, 1.3) and metal dust (OR = 1.2, 95% CI: 1.0, 1.4); and HNSCC risk
increased for each decade of occupational leather dust exposure (OR = 1.5, 95%
CI: 1.2, 1.9). We have provided evidence for an association between occupational 
sawdust and metal dust and laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma, and leather dust
and HNSCC, with increasing risk with longer duration at the exposed occupation.

© 2013 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cam4.155 
PMCID: PMC3892403
PMID: 24403272  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
