

1063. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2014 May;20(5):O325-32. doi: 10.1111/1469-0691.12403. Epub
2013 Nov 6.

The allele 4 of neck region liver-lymph node-specific ICAM-3-grabbing integrin
variant is associated with spontaneous clearance of hepatitis C virus and
decrease of viral loads.

Ezzikouri S(1), Rebbani K, Fakhir FZ, Alaoui R, Nadir S, Diepolder H, Thursz M,
Khakoo SI, Benjelloun S.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Unit, Viral Hepatitis Laboratory, Pasteur Institute of Morocco,
Casablanca, Morocco.

L-SIGN is a C-type lectin expressed on liver sinusoidal endothelial cells
involved in the capture of hepatitis C virus and trans-infection of adjacent
hepatocyte cells. The neck region of L-SIGN is highly polymorphic, with three to 
nine tandem repeats of 23 residues. This polymorphism is associated with a number
of infectious diseases, but has not been explored in HCV. We therefore
investigated the impact of L-SIGN neck region length variation on the outcome of 
HCV infection. We studied 322 subjects, 150 patients with persistent HCV
infection, 63 individuals with spontaneous clearance and 109 healthy controls. In
healthy subjects, we found a total of nine genotypes, with the 7/7 genotype being
the most frequent (33%) followed by the 7/6 (22.9%) and the 7/5 (18.3%). The
frequencies of the alleles were as follows: 7-LSIGN (56.4%), 6-LSIGN (20.2%),
5-L-SIGN (18.3%) and 4-L-SIGN (5%). The frequency of the 7/4 genotype was higher 
in spontaneous resolvers (14.3%) as compared with the persistent group (4%) (OR =
0.25, 95% CI = 0.07-0.82, p 0.022). In addition, we found that 4-L-SIGN was
associated with spontaneous resolution of HCV infection (OR = 0.30, 95%CI,
0.12-0.74, p 0.005). Interestingly, patients with 4-L-SIGN had lower viral loads 
when compared with carriers of the 5 (p 0.001), 6 (p 0.021) and 7-alleles (p
0.048). The results indicate that neck region polymorphism of L-SIGN can
influence the outcome of HCV infection and the four-tandem repeat is associated
with clearance of HCV infection.

© 2013 The Authors Clinical Microbiology and Infection © 2013 European Society of
Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases.

DOI: 10.1111/1469-0691.12403 
PMID: 24283933  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
