

1070. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2011 Nov;268(11):1541-7. doi:
10.1007/s00405-011-1714-8. Epub 2011 Jul 27.

Evidence for a causal association for HPV in head and neck cancers.

Sudhoff HH(1), Schwarze HP, Winder D, Steinstraesser L, Görner M, Stanley M, Goon
PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Academic Teaching
Hospital of University of Münster, Bielefeld, Germany,
Holger.Sudhoff@Klinikum-bielefeld.de

Current data have now attributed a viral etiology and causality of Human
papillomavirus (HPV). Epidemiological analysis of the last decade demonstrates a 
rapid increase of HPV-associated HNSCC. Genomic detection of HPV DNA in the
nuclei of certain oro-pharyngeal cancer cells gives strong evidence of a viral
etiology in HNSCC. Non-smokers, non-drinkers, and a sexual debut at a younger age
and other sexual risk factors have an increased risk of HPV-positive
oropharyngeal cancer. Sexual transmission is considered to play a causal role. In
contrast to HPV-negative HNSCC most studies reveal a favorable prognosis for
HPV-positive tumors. There is evidence of alterations in the p53 pathway through 
expression of E6 oncogene with subsequent induction of tumor cell proliferation. 
Synergies between viral oncogenes and other carcinogens are hypothesized. HPV
alone appears to be insufficient as the sole cause of HNSCC; this may explain the
long latency period between HPV infection and cancer development. There is now
sufficient evidence for a causal role for HPV in HNSCC. As in cervical cancer,
HPV requires oncogenes and co-factors for tumor development. Thus, inhibition or 
loss of such co-factors may lead to tumor regression. The vast amounts of
epidemiological, molecular pathological and in vitro experimental data are
consistent with the hypothesis that HPV does indeed have a causal role. We await 
final validation from animal experimentation in which regression of HPV-positive 
tumors will follow from loss or inhibition of E6 and E7.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-011-1714-8 
PMID: 21792686  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
