

1071. Cell Cycle. 2013 Mar 15;12(6):923-34. doi: 10.4161/cc.23882. Epub 2013 Feb 19.

Liberation of functional p53 by proteasome inhibition in human papilloma
virus-positive head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cells promotes apoptosis and
cell cycle arrest.

Li C(1), Johnson DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh and the University of
Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2013 Apr 1;12(7):1020-1.
    Cell Cycle. 2013 Mar 15;12(6):868.

Human papilloma virus (HPV) infection represents an emerging risk factor in head 
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). In contrast to HPV-negative HNSCC, most
cases of HPV-positive HNSCC encode wild-type p53, although the p53 protein in
these cells is rapidly degraded via HPV E6-mediated ubiquitination and subsequent
proteasomal degradation. This unique feature of HPV-positive HNSCC has raised
hope that liberation of wild-type p53 from the E6 protein may have therapeutic
benefit in this disease. Indeed, suppression of E6 expression promotes apoptosis 
in HPV-positive HNSCC cell lines. However, the role of p53 in mediating this cell
death has not been determined. Here, we demonstrate that siRNAs targeting the
E6/E7 RNA, or treatment with the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib, resulted in
upregulation of functional p53 and p53 gene targets in three HPV-positive HNSCC
cell lines, but not in HPV-negative HNSCC cells. Apoptosis induced by E6/E7 siRNA
in HPV-positive cells was found to be dependent on p53, while bortezomib-induced 
cell death was modestly p53-dependent. Treatment with subtoxic doses of
bortezomib led to cell cycle arrest in HPV-positive, but not HPV-negative HNSCC
cells. Moreover, this cell cycle arrest was mediated by p53 and the cell cycle
inhibitor p21, the product of a p53 target gene. Collectively, these findings
establish that wild-type p53 encoded by HPV-positive HNSCC cells, once liberated 
from HPV E6, can play important roles in promoting apoptosis and cell cycle
arrest.

DOI: 10.4161/cc.23882 
PMCID: PMC3637351
PMID: 23421999  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
