

1072. Carcinogenesis. 2015 Jan;36(1):151-9. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgu236. Epub 2014 Nov
21.

Interferon treatment of human keratinocytes harboring extrachromosomal,
persistent HPV-16 plasmid genomes induces de novo viral integration.

Lace MJ(1), Anson JR(2), Haugen TH(3), Dierdorff JM(2), Turek LP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Veterans Affairs Healthcare System and The Department of Pathology, University
of Iowa Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA 52242,
USA michael-lace@uiowa.edu.
(2)Veterans Affairs Healthcare System and.
(3)Veterans Affairs Healthcare System and The Department of Pathology, University
of Iowa Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA 52242,
USA.

Interferons (IFNs) have been used to treat epithelial lesions caused by human
papillomavirus (HPV) persistence. Here, we exposed primary human keratinocytes
(HFKs) immortalized by persistently replicating HPV-16 plasmid genomes to
increasing levels of IFN-γ. While untreated HFKs retained replicating HPV-16
plasmids for up to 60-120 population doublings, IFN led to rapid HPV-16 plasmid
loss. However, treated cultures eventually gave rise to outgrowth of clones
harboring integrated HPV-16 genomes expressing viral E6 and E7 oncogenes from
chimeric virus-cell mRNAs similar to those in cervical and head and neck cancers.
Surprisingly, every HPV-16 integrant that arose after IFN exposure stemmed from
an independent integration event into a different cellular gene locus, even
within parallel cultures started from small cell inocula and cultured separately 
for ≥ 25 doublings to permit the rise and expansion of spontaneous integrants.
While IFN treatment conferred a growth advantage upon preexisting integrants
added to mixed control cultures, our results indicate that IFN exposure directly 
or indirectly induces HPV-16 integration, rather than only selects preexisting,
spontaneous integrants that appear to be much less frequent. We estimate that IFN
exposure increased integration rates by ≥ 100-fold. IFN-induced HPV-16
integration involved a wide range of chromosomal loci with less apparent
selection for recurrent insertions near genes involved in cancer-related
pathways. We conclude that IFNs and other potential treatments targeting
high-risk HPV persistence that disrupt viral genome replication may promote
increased high-risk HPV integration as a step in cancer progression. Therapies
against high-risk HPV persistence thus need to be evaluated for their
integration-inducing potential.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/bgu236 
PMID: 25416558  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
