

1079. Mod Rheumatol. 2017 Jan;27(1):155-161. doi: 10.3109/14397595.2014.948981. Epub
2014 Aug 27.

Visceral disseminated varicella zoster virus infection after rituximab treatment 
for granulomatosis with polyangiitis.

Tsuji H(1), Yoshifuji H(1), Fujii T(1), Matsuo T(1), Nakashima R(1), Imura Y(1), 
Yukawa N(1), Ohmura K(1), Sumiyoshi S(2), Mimori T(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology , Graduate School of
Medicine, Kyoto University , Kyoto , Japan.
(2)b Department of Diagnostic Pathology , Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University , Kyoto , Japan.

We report on a 30-year-old Japanese woman with granulomatosis with polyangiitis
(GPA) complicated by pituitary diabetes insipidus and multiple lung granulomas.
The granulomas disappeared with prednisolone (50 mg/day) and rituximab, although 
continuous nasal desmopressin was needed to control diabetes insipidus after
immunosuppressive therapies. At the time of presentation, the patient had
abdominal pain and disseminated intravascular coagulation but no rash. She died
of continuous hemorrhage from her skin of neck, mucosa of her pharynx, and small 
intestine. At autopsy, varicella zoster virus (VZV)-DNA detected in serum and VZV
antigens detected in tissues of her pharynx, esophagus, and liver led to a
diagnosis of visceral disseminated VZV infection (VD-VZV). She also complicated
cytomegalovirus infection in her stomach and ovaries. Her posterior pituitary
gland had been replaced by foamy macrophages. In 38 reported cases of VD-VZV,
rash appeared following the onset of abdominal pain (mean interval, 6.5 days) but
was lacking in 11% of cases. The mortality rate associated with VD-VZV was as
high as 29% and survived cases were treated with antivirals earlier than mortal
cases. A quick diagnosis with detection of VZV-DNA or VZV antigens in sera or
tissues using PCR or immunohistochemistry examination and early empirical
treatment with antivirals are important.

DOI: 10.3109/14397595.2014.948981 
PMID: 25159158  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
