

1080. Cancer Lett. 2013 Aug 28;337(1):1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.05.018. Epub 2013
May 17.

Pathogenic role of Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein-1 in the
development of nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Yoshizaki T(1), Kondo S, Wakisaka N, Murono S, Endo K, Sugimoto H, Nakanishi S,
Tsuji A, Ito M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Graduate School of Medical
Science, Kanazawa University, 13-1 Takaramachi, Kanazawa 920-8640, Japan.
tomoy@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

Undifferentiated nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is an Epstein-Barr
virus-associated malignant tumor. A consistent elevation in EBV antibody titers
is a well-established risk factor for the development of NPC. The
pathophysiological relationship and molecular mechanisms of EBV-mediated
carcinogenesis have not been fully elucidated. While NPC tumors are known to
express three EBV-encoded proteins, EBNA1, LMP1, and LMP2, they also express a
large number of virus-encoded small RNAs (EBERs) and microRNAs (miRNAs). Among
them, LMP1 may be a central player in the development of NPC. LMP1, an
EBV-encoded primary oncogene, functions as a viral mimic of the TNFR family
member, CD40, and engages in a number of signaling pathways that induce
morphological and phenotypic alterations in epithelial cells. LMP1 upregulates
EMT, and contributes to the highly metastatic features of NPC. Moreover,
LMP1-associated EMT is accompanied by the expression of cancer stem cell
(CSC)/cancer progenitor cell (CPC) markers (CD44high/CD24low) and the acquisition
of stem cell/progenitor cell-like properties. BART miRNAs, encoded from the
BamHI-A region of the viral genome, are the most abundant transcripts. They
modulate apoptosis and host innate immune defense mechanisms. Some BART1 miRNAs
are considered to negatively regulate LMP1 protein expression. LMP1 is secreted
via exosomes, is incorporated into EBV-uninfected cells by endocytosis, and
affects the environment surrounding the tumor. Here we reviewed the contribution 
of EBV gene products to NPC pathogenesis in relation with LMP1.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.05.018 
PMID: 23689138  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
