

1085. Front Immunol. 2018 Jul 30;9:1586. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01586. eCollection
2018.

Entry Inhibition and Modulation of Pro-Inflammatory Immune Response Against
Influenza A Virus by a Recombinant Truncated Surfactant Protein D.

Al-Ahdal MN(1), Murugaiah V(2), Varghese PM(2), Abozaid SM(1), Saba I(1),
Al-Qahtani AA(1), Pathan AA(2), Kouser L(2)(3), Nal B(2), Kishore U(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection and Immunity, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and
Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Biosciences, College of Health and Life Sciences, Brunel University London,
Uxbridge, United Kingdom.
(3)Allergy & Clinical Immunology Inflammation, Repair and Development, Imperial
College London, London, United Kingdom.

Surfactant protein D (SP-D) is expressed in the mucosal secretion of the lung and
contributes to the innate host defense against a variety of pathogens, including 
influenza A virus (IAV). SP-D can inhibit hemagglutination and infectivity of
IAV, in addition to reducing neuraminidase (NA) activity via its carbohydrate
recognition domain (CRD) binding to carbohydrate patterns (N-linked mannosylated)
on NA and hemagglutinin (HA) of IAV. Here, we demonstrate that a recombinant
fragment of human SP-D (rfhSP-D), containing homotrimeric neck and CRD regions,
acts as an entry inhibitor of IAV and downregulates M1 expression considerably in
A549 cells challenged with IAV of H1N1 and H3N2 subtypes at 2 h treatment. In
addition, rfhSP-D downregulated mRNA levels of TNF-α, IFN-α, IFN-β, IL-6, and
RANTES, particularly during the initial stage of IAV infection of A549 cell line.
rfhSP-D also interfered with IAV infection of Madin Darby canine kidney (MDCK)
cells through HA binding. Furthermore, rfhSP-D was found to reduce luciferase
reporter activity in MDCK cells transduced with H1+N1 pseudotyped lentiviral
particles, where 50% of reduction was observed with 10 µg/ml rfhSP-D, suggestive 
of a critical role of rfhSP-D as an entry inhibitor against IAV infectivity.
Multiplex cytokine array revealed that rfhSP-D treatment of IAV challenged A549
cells led to a dramatic suppression of key pro-inflammatory cytokines and
chemokines. In the case of pH1N1, TNF-α, IFN-α, IL-10, IL-12 (p40), VEGF, GM-CSF,
and eotaxin were considerably suppressed by rfhSP-D treatment at 24 h. However,
these suppressive effects on IL-10, VEGF, eotaxin and IL-12 (p40) were not so
evident in the case of H3N2 subtype, with the exception of TNF-α, IFN-α, and
GM-CSF. These data seem to suggest that the extent of immunomodulatory effect of 
SP-D on host cells can vary considerably in a IAV subtype-specific manner. Thus, 
rfhSP-D treatment can downregulate pro-inflammatory milieu encouraged by IAV that
otherwise causes aberrant inflammatory cell recruitment leading to cell death and
lung damage.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01586 
PMCID: PMC6077238
PMID: 30105014  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
