

1089. Cancer Sci. 2010 Jun;101(6):1511-20. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01551.x. Epub 
2010 Feb 4.

Frequent alterations of the candidate genes hMLH1, ITGA9 and RBSP3 in early
dysplastic lesions of head and neck: clinical and prognostic significance.

Ghosh A(1), Ghosh S, Maiti GP, Sabbir MG, Zabarovsky ER, Roy A, Roychoudhury S,
Panda CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncogene Regulation and Gynaecology Oncology, Chittaranjan
National Cancer Institute, Kolkata, India.

To understand the association between candidate tumor suppressor genes (TSGs)
human mismatch repair protein homologue 1 (hMLH1), AP20 region gene 1 (APRG1),
integrin alpha RLC (ITGA9), RB1 serine phosphates from human chromosome 3 (RBSP3)
at chromosomal 3p22.3 region and development of head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC), alterations (deletion/promoter methylation/expression) of
these genes were analyzed in 65 dysplastic lesions and 84 HNSCC samples.
Clinicopathological correlations were made with alterations of the genes. In
HNSCC, deletion frequencies of hMLH1, ITGA9, and RBSP3 were comparatively higher 
than APRG1. Overall alterations (deletion/methylation) of hMLH1, ITGA9, and RBSP3
were high (45-55%) in mild dysplasia and comparable in subsequent stages of tumor
progression. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis showed reduced expression of these
genes in tumors concordant to their molecular alterations. An in vitro
demethylation experiment by 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine confirmed the promoter
hypermethylation of RBSP3 in Hep2 and UPCI:SCC084 cell lines. Functionally
less-active RBSP3A isoform was predominant in tumor tissues contrary to the
adjacent normal tissue of tumors where more active RBSP3B isoform was prevalent. 
In immunohistochemical analysis, intense nuclear staining of hMLH1 and pRB
(phosphorylated RB, the substrate of RBSP3) proteins were seen in the basal layer
of normal epithelium. In tumors, concordance was seen between (i)
low/intermediate level of hMLH1 expression and its molecular alterations; and
(ii) intense nuclear staining of pRB and RBSP3 alterations. Poor patient outcome 
was seen with hMLH1 and RBSP3 alterations. Moreover, in absence of human
papilloma virus (HPV) infection, tobacco-addicted patients with hMLH1, RBSP3
alterations, and nodal invasions showed poor prognosis. Thus our data suggests
that dysregulation of hMLH1, ITGA9, and RBSP3 associated multiple cellular
pathways are needed for the development of early dysplastic lesions of the head
and neck.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01551.x 
PMID: 20412120  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
