

1095. Int J Cancer. 2017 Aug 15;141(4):664-670. doi: 10.1002/ijc.30716. Epub 2017 Jun
8.

Worldwide burden of cancer attributable to HPV by site, country and HPV type.

de Martel C(1), Plummer M(1), Vignat J(1), Franceschi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France.

HPV is the cause of almost all cervical cancer and is responsible for a
substantial fraction of other anogenital cancers and oropharyngeal cancers.
Understanding the HPV-attributable cancer burden can boost programs of HPV
vaccination and HPV-based cervical screening. Attributable fractions (AFs) and
the relative contributions of different HPV types were derived from published
studies reporting on the prevalence of transforming HPV infection in cancer
tissue. Maps of age-standardized incidence rates of HPV-attributable cancers by
country from GLOBOCAN 2012 data are shown separately for the cervix, other
anogenital tract and head and neck cancers. The relative contribution of HPV16/18
and HPV6/11/16/18/31/33/45/52/58 was also estimated. 4.5% of all cancers
worldwide (630,000 new cancer cases per year) are attributable to HPV: 8.6% in
women and 0.8% in men. AF in women ranges from <3% in Australia/New Zealand and
the USA to >20% in India and sub-Saharan Africa. Cervix accounts for 83% of
HPV-attributable cancer, two-thirds of which occur in less developed countries.
Other HPV-attributable anogenital cancer includes 8,500 vulva; 12,000 vagina;
35,000 anus (half occurring in men) and 13,000 penis. In the head and neck,
HPV-attributable cancers represent 38,000 cases of which 21,000 are oropharyngeal
cancers occurring in more developed countries. The relative contributions of
HPV16/18 and HPV6/11/16/18/31/33/45/52/58 are 73% and 90%, respectively.
Universal access to vaccination is the key to avoiding most cases of
HPV-attributable cancer. The preponderant burden of HPV16/18 and the possibility 
of cross-protection emphasize the importance of the introduction of more
affordable vaccines in less developed countries.

Â© 2017 International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC/WHO); licensed by UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.30716 
PMCID: PMC5520228
PMID: 28369882  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
