

1096. Oncol Rep. 2013 May;29(5):1962-8. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2327. Epub 2013 Mar 5.

Human papillomavirus infection in head and neck cancer: the role of the secretory
leukocyte protease inhibitor.

Hoffmann M(1), Quabius ES, Tribius S, Hebebrand L, Görögh T, Halec G, Kahn T,
Hedderich J, Röcken C, Haag J, Waterboer T, Schmitt M, Giuliano AR, Kast WM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Christian-Albrechts 
University Kiel, D-24105 Kiel, Germany. mhoffmann@hno.uni-kiel.de

We previously showed that secretory leukocyte protease inhibitor (SLPI) gene and 
protein expression is significantly lower in metastatic versus non-metastatic
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). However, we did not assess the
human papillomavirus (HPV) status of these cases. Since SLPI plays a role in HIV 
and herpes simplex virus (HSV) infections, we hypothesized that SLPI may be
involved in HPV-infected HNSCC. In HNSCC tissue (n=54), HPV DNA was determined
and correlated with SLPI expression. Additionally, to investigate a possible role
of smoking on SLPI expression in clinically normal mucosa, 19 patients treated
for non‑malignant diseases (non-HNSCC) were analyzed for SLPI expression and
correlated with smoking habits. In HNSCC patients, SLPI expression showed a
significant inverse correlation with HPV status. In patients with moderate/strong
SLPI expression (n=19), 10.5% were HPV-positive. By contrast, patients with
absent/weak SLPI expression (n=35), 45.7% were HPV-positive. Low SLPI expression 
was correlated with metastasis (P=0.003) independent of HPV status.
HPV-positivity was clearly associated with lymph node status (81.3% N1-3 cases). 
In smoking non-HNSCC patients (n=7), 42.9% showed absent/weak and 57.1%
moderate/strong SLPI staining. In non-smoking non-HNSCC patients (n=10) 83.3%
showed absent/weak and 16.7% moderate/strong SLPI expression. For the first time,
a correlation between SLPI downregulation and HPV infection was demonstrated,
suggesting that high levels of SLPI, possibly induced by environmental factors
such as tobacco smoking, correlate with protective effects against HPV infection.
SLPI may be a potential biomarker identifying head and neck cancer patients not
at risk of developing metastases (SLPI-positive), and those at risk to be
infected by HPV (SLPI-negative) and likely to develop metastases.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2013.2327 
PMCID: PMC3658815
PMID: 23467841  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
