

1097. Virchows Arch. 2015 Jul;467(1):111-7. doi: 10.1007/s00428-015-1779-7. Epub 2015
May 10.

Epstein-Barr virus-positive primary cutaneous follicle centre lymphoma; an
age-related phenomenon?

van der Horst MP(1), Hardwick A, Rahilly M, Goodlad JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Western General Hospital, Alexander Donald Building, 
1st Floor, Crewe Road, Edinburgh, EH4 2XU, Scotland, UK.

Primary cutaneous follicle centre lymphoma is the most frequently encountered
primary cutaneous B cell lymphoma, often presenting in the head and neck region. 
Treatment is locally directed with surgery and/or radiotherapy. The prognosis is 
usually excellent with only local recurrences and generally no dissemination to
extracutaneous sites. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is frequently encountered in
lymphoproliferative disorders associated with immunosuppression, typically
iatrogenic and congenital, or acquired as a consequence of a human
immunodeficiency virus infection. More recently, age-related immune senescence
has been proposed as a main driver in the evolution of EBV-positive
lymphoproliferative disorders. We report a 50-year-old male presenting with a
2-3-year history of an inflamed eruption centred on the forehead and scalp.
Incisional biopsy showed pathological features typical of primary cutaneous
follicle centre lymphoma (PCFCL), and in the absence of systemic disease, he was 
treated with local radical radiotherapy. A cutaneous relapse occurred 10 months
after initial diagnosis and 29 months after completing radiotherapy, he presented
with a right-sided submandibular lymph node mass. Pathological examination of an 
excised node showed an EBV-positive diffuse large B cell lymphoma. Retrospective 
examination of the presenting PCFCL also showed the neoplastic lymphoid cells to 
be positive for EBV, both by in situ hybridization and on immunohistochemical
staining for LMP1. EBV-associated PCFCL is an extremely rare occurrence. We
speculate that, in this case, the EBV-positive lymphoma has most likely arisen as
a consequence of age-related immune senescence, thereby further expanding the
pathological spectrum of age-related EBV-associated B cell lymphoproliferations.

DOI: 10.1007/s00428-015-1779-7 
PMID: 25957860  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
