

1099. MAbs. 2014 Jan-Feb;6(1):130-42.

Generation of “LYmph Node Derived Antibody Libraries” (LYNDAL) for selecting
fully human antibody fragments with therapeutic potential.

Diebolder P, Keller A, Haase S, Schlegelmilch A, Kiefer JD, Karimi T, Weber T,
Moldenhauer G, Kehm R, Eis-Hübinger AM, Jäger D, Federspil PA, Herold-Mende C,
Dyckhoff G, Kontermann RE, Arndt MA, Krauss J.

The development of efficient strategies for generating fully human monoclonal
antibodies with unique functional properties that are exploitable for tailored
therapeutic interventions remains a major challenge in the antibody technology
field. Here, we present a methodology for recovering such antibodies from
antigen-encountered human B cell repertoires. As the source for variable antibody
genes, we cloned immunoglobulin G (IgG)-derived B cell repertoires from lymph
nodes of 20 individuals undergoing surgery for head and neck cancer. Sequence
analysis of unselected “LYmph Node Derived Antibody Libraries” (LYNDAL) revealed 
a naturally occurring distribution pattern of rearranged antibody sequences,
representing all known variable gene families and most functional germline
sequences. To demonstrate the feasibility for selecting antibodies with
therapeutic potential from these repertoires, seven LYNDAL from donors with high 
serum titers against herpes simplex virus (HSV) were panned on recombinant
glycoprotein B of HSV-1. Screening for specific binders delivered 34 single-chain
variable fragments (scFvs) with unique sequences. Sequence analysis revealed
extensive somatic hypermutation of enriched clones as a result of affinity
maturation. Binding of scFvs to common glycoprotein B variants from HSV-1 and
HSV-2 strains was highly specific, and the majority of analyzed antibody
fragments bound to the target antigen with nanomolar affinity. From eight scFvs
with HSV-neutralizing capacity in vitro,the most potent antibody neutralized 50% 
HSV-2 at 4.5 nM as a dimeric (scFv)2. We anticipate our approach to be useful for
recovering fully human antibodies with therapeutic potential.

DOI: 10.4161/mabs.27236 
PMCID: PMC3929437
PMID: 24256717  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
