

1101. PLoS One. 2016 May 12;11(5):e0155003. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0155003.
eCollection 2016.

Enumerating Virus-Like Particles and Bacterial Populations in the Sinuses of
Chronic Rhinosinusitis Patients Using Flow Cytometry.

Carlson-Jones JA(1), Paterson JS(1), Newton K(1), Smith RJ(1), Dann LM(1), Speck 
P(1), Mitchell JG(1), Wormald PJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Flinders University, Adelaide, South Australia,
Australia.
(2)Department of Surgery-Otolaryngology Head & Neck Surgery, The University of
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.

There is increasing evidence to suggest that the sinus microbiome plays a role in
the pathogenesis of chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS). However, the concentration of
these microorganisms within the sinuses is still unknown. We show that flow
cytometry can be used to enumerate bacteria and virus-like particles (VLPs) in
sinus flush samples of CRS patients. This was achieved through trialling 5 sample
preparation techniques for flow cytometry. We found high concentrations of
bacteria and VLPs in these samples. Untreated samples produced the highest
average bacterial and VLP counts with 3.3 ± 0.74 x 10(7) bacteria ml(-1) and 2.4 
± 1.23 x 10(9) VLP ml(-1) of sinus flush (n = 9). These counts were significantly
higher than most of the treated samples (p < 0.05). Results showed 10(3) and
10(4) times inter-patient variation for bacteria and VLP concentrations. This
wide variation suggests that diagnosis and treatment need to be personalised and 
that utilising flow cytometry is useful and efficient for this. This study is the
first to enumerate bacterial and VLP populations in the maxillary sinus of CRS
patients. The relevance of enumeration is that with increasing antimicrobial
resistance, antibiotics are becoming less effective at treating bacterial
infections of the sinuses, so alternative therapies are needed. Phage therapy has
been proposed as one such alternative, but for dosing, the abundance of bacteria 
is required. Knowledge of whether phages are normally present in the sinuses will
assist in gauging the safety of applying phage therapy to sinuses. Our finding,
that large numbers of VLP are frequently present in sinuses, indicates that phage
therapy may represent a minimally disruptive intervention towards the nasal
microbiome. We propose that flow cytometry can be used as a tool to assess
microbial biomass dynamics in sinuses and other anatomical locations where
infection can cause disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0155003 
PMCID: PMC4865123
PMID: 27171169  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
