

1104. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Aug 19;111(33):12211-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1321655111. Epub 2014 Aug 6.

Temporal and spatial organization of ESCRT protein recruitment during HIV-1
budding.

Bleck M(1), Itano MS(1), Johnson DS(1), Thomas VK(2), North AJ(2), Bieniasz
PD(3), Simon SM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Biophysics and.
(2)Bio-Imaging Resource Center, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065;
and.
(3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Center,
Laboratory of Retrovirology, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10016.
(4)Laboratory of Cellular Biophysics and simon@rockefeller.edu.

HIV-1 virions assemble at the plasma membrane of mammalian cells and recruit the 
endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) machinery to enable
particle release. However, little is known about the temporal and spatial
organization of ESCRT protein recruitment. Using multiple-color live-cell total
internal reflection fluorescence microscopy, we observed that the ESCRT-I protein
Tsg101 is recruited together with Gag to the sites of HIV-1 assembly, whereas
later-acting ESCRT proteins (Chmp4b and Vps4A) are recruited sequentially, once
Gag assembly is completed. Chmp4b, a protein that is required to mediate particle
scission, is recruited to HIV-1 assembly sites âˆ¼10 s before the ATPase Vps4A.
Using two-color superresolution imaging, we observed that the ESCRT machinery
(Tsg101, Alix, and Chmp4b/c proteins) is positioned at the periphery of the
nascent virions, with the Tsg101 assemblages positioned closer to the Gag
assemblages than Alix, Chmp4b, or Chmp4c. These results are consistent with the
notion that the ESCRT machinery is recruited transiently to the neck of the
assembling particle and is thus present at the appropriate time and place to
mediate fission between the nascent virus and the plasma membrane.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1321655111 
PMCID: PMC4142993
PMID: 25099357  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
