

1105. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2012 Jan;16(1):7-12. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2011.07.003.
Epub 2011 Oct 15.

Changing trends in human papillomavirus-associated head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma.

Wang XI(1), Thomas J, Zhang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Louisiana State University Health Science Center,
Shreveport, 71130, USA.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) continues to be a significant
disease with varying rates of incidence and mortality worldwide. Numerous studies
have demonstrated that human papillomavirus (HPV) is etiologically linked with a 
subset of HNSCC, independent of tobacco and alcohol use. This subset of tumor
shows increased sensitivity to radiation therapy and association with better
outcomes. The study aims to determine the HPV burden and trend among patients
with HNSCC in the southern region of the United States over the past 10 years. Of
142 cases from 2000 to 2004, 18 (13%) were positive for high-risk HPV. Nine of
these were oropharyngeal tumors, including 4 cases from the tonsil. These
constitute 38% (9/24) of all oropharyngeal tumors and 57% (4/7) of tonsillar
tumors. Of 35 cases from 2009 to 2010, 14 (40%) were positive for high-risk HPV. 
Thirteen of these were oropharyngeal tumors, including 9 cases from the tonsil.
These constitute 59% (13/23) of oropharyngeal tumors and 64% (9/14) of tonsillar 
tumors. When data from the 2 periods are combined, the results show that African 
American patients are less likely to have HPV-associated disease compared with
white patients (9% vs 22%). Human papillomavirus-positive and oropharyngeal HNSCC
are more likely to be nonkeratinizing (P < .0001). In conclusion, the HPV
detection rate in oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma increased from 38% to 59%
between the 2000-to-2004 and 2009-to-2010 periods.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2011.07.003 
PMID: 22001331  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
