

1107. Oral Oncol. 2016 May;56:78-83. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2016.03.012. Epub 2016
Mar 28.

Association of genetic variants with tumor HPV16 status and survival in squamous 
cell carcinoma of the oropharynx.

Feng Y(1), Li Y(2), Zhang Y(3), Zheng H(4), Li G(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head & Neck Surgery, China Japan Friendship 
Hospital, Beijing 100029, China.
(2)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department of Otolaryngology, Union
Hospital of Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan 430022, China.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Beijing Tongren Hospital, 
Capital Medical University, Key Laboratory of Otolaryngology Head and Neck
Surgery, Ministry of Education, Beijing Institute of Otolaryngology, Beijing
100730, China.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Changhai Hospital,
Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China. Electronic address:
zheng_hl2004@163.com.
(5)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department of Epidemiology, The University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address:
gli@mdanderson.org.

OBJECTIVES: Genetic polymorphisms of genes in cell cycle, apoptosis, and
inflammation/immune response pathways may control the mechanisms of HPV clearance
and HPV escape of immune surveillance and thus may affect both tumor HPV16 status
and possibly related outcomes of squamous cell carcinoma of the oropharynx
(SCCOP) patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We determined tumor HPV16 status and genotyped selected
polymorphisms in key genes involved in cell cycle, apoptosis, and
inflammation/immune response pathways in 401 incident SCCOP patients.
Unconditional logistic regression models, Kaplan-Meier analysis, and Cox
proportional hazards regression were used to evaluate associations and survival.
RESULTS: Compared to the corresponding common homozygous genotypes, the variant
genotypes of genes in cell cycle (p53, p73, MDM2, p16), apoptosis (CASP8, and
Fas), and inflammation/immune response pathways (IL1β and IL10) were
significantly associated with HPV16-positive tumors among SCCOP patients. In
HPV16-positive SCCOP patients only, compared to those with the corresponding
common homozygous genotypes, patients with variant genotypes of p53 (119G>C),
MDM2 (309T>G), p16 (580C>T), Fas (1377G>A), and IL1β (14T>C) had significantly
better overall survival, and approximately 40-70% reduced or 5-fold increased
risk of overall death, respectively, after adjustment for important prognostic
confounders. Moreover, the combined adverse genotypes of 5 variants were also
significantly associated with reduced risk of overall death of HPV16-positive
SCCOP.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that genetic polymorphisms in likely functional
regions of the genes in these pathways may individually or, more likely, jointly 
affect individual susceptibility to HPV16 tumor status and constitute the
confounding effect on HPV16-related clinical outcomes. Validation of our findings
is warranted.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2016.03.012 
PMID: 27086490  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
