

1121. BMC Cancer. 2013 Jan 8;13:10. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-10.

Estimating the clinical benefits of vaccinating boys and girls against
HPV-related diseases in Europe.

Marty R(1), Roze S, Bresse X, Largeron N, Smith-Palmer J.

Author information: 
(1)HEVA, 186 Avenue Thiers, Lyon, 69006, France. rmarty@hevaweb.com

BACKGROUND: HPV is related to a number of cancer types, causing a considerable
burden in both genders in Europe. Female vaccination programs can substantially
reduce the incidence of HPV-related diseases in women and, to some extent, men
through herd immunity. The objective was to estimate the incremental benefit of
vaccinating boys and girls using the quadrivalent HPV vaccine in Europe versus
girls-only vaccination. Incremental benefits in terms of reduction in the
incidence of HPV 6, 11, 16 and 18-related diseases (including cervical, vaginal, 
vulvar, anal, penile, and head and neck carcinomas and genital warts) were
assessed.
METHODS: The analysis was performed using a model constructed in
Microsoft(Â®)Excel, based on a previously-published dynamic transmission model of 
HPV vaccination and published European epidemiological data on incidence of
HPV-related diseases. The incremental benefits of vaccinating 12-year old girls
and boys versus girls-only vaccination was assessed (70% vaccine coverage were
assumed for both). Sensitivity analyses around vaccine coverage and duration of
protection were performed.
RESULTS: Compared with screening alone, girls-only vaccination led to 84%
reduction in HPV 16/18-related carcinomas in females and a 61% reduction in
males. Vaccination of girls and boys led to a 90% reduction in HPV 16/18-related 
carcinomas in females and 86% reduction in males versus screening alone. Relative
to a girls-only program, vaccination of girls and boys led to a reduction in
female and male HPV-related carcinomas of 40% and 65%, respectively and a
reduction in the incidence of HPV 6/11-related genital warts of 58% for females
and 71% for males versus girls-only vaccination.
CONCLUSIONS: In Europe, the vaccination of 12-year old boys and girls against HPV
6, 11, 16 and 18 would be associated with substantial additional clinical
benefits in terms of reduced incidence of HPV-related genital warts and
carcinomas versus girls-only vaccination. The incremental benefits of adding boys
vaccination are highly dependent on coverage in girls. Therefore, further
analyses should be performed taking into account the country-specific situation. 
In addition to clinical benefits, substantial economic benefits are also
anticipated and warrant further investigation as do the social and ethical
implications of including boys in vaccination programs.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-10 
PMCID: PMC3561184
PMID: 23298365  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
