

1123. Virchows Arch. 2013 Apr;462(4):381-9. doi: 10.1007/s00428-013-1393-5. Epub 2013
Mar 17.

Detection of HPV infection in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma: a practical 
proposal.

Dreyer JH(1), Hauck F, Oliveira-Silva M, Barros MH, Niedobitek G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pathology, Unfallkrankenhaus Berlin, Warener Str. 7, 12683
Berlin, Germany.

Detecting human papillomavirus (HPV) infection in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) is clinically relevant, but there is no agreement about the
most appropriate methodology. We have studied 64 oropharyngeal carcinomas using
p16 immunohistochemistry, HPV DNA in situ hybridisation (ISH) and HPV DNA
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) followed by pyrosequencing. We have also
evaluated a new assay, RNAscope, designed to detect HPV E6/E7 RNA transcripts.
Using a threshold of 70 % labelled tumour cells, 21 cases (32.8 %) were p16
positive. Of these, 19 cases scored positive with at least one HPV detection
assay. Sixteen cases were positive by HPV DNA-ISH, and 18 cases were positive
using the E6/E7 RNAscope assay. By PCR and pyrosequencing, HPV16 was detected in 
15 cases, while one case each harboured HPV33, 35 and 56. All p16-negative cases 
were negative using these assays. We conclude that p16 expression is a useful
surrogate marker for HPV infection in HNSCC with a high negative predictive value
and that p16-positive cases should be further evaluated for HPV infection,
preferably by PCR followed by type determination. Using RNase digestion
experiments, we show that the RNAscope assay is not suitable for the reliable
discrimination between E6/E7 RNA transcripts and viral DNA.

DOI: 10.1007/s00428-013-1393-5 
PMID: 23503925  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
