

1125. Int J Cancer. 2014 Oct 1;135(7):1653-61. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28811. Epub 2014 Mar 7.

High-risk HPV types and head and neck cancer.

Michaud DS(1), Langevin SM, Eliot M, Nelson HH, Pawlita M, McClean MD, Kelsey KT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Brown School of Public Health, Brown University,
Providence, RI; Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public
Health, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Int J Cancer. 2015 Jan 15;136(2):491-2.

Although HPV16 has been strongly implicated in oropharyngeal carcinogenesis, the 
role of other high-risk HPV types in the etiology of head and neck cancer remains
unclear. To date, few data exist addressing the nature of the association between
antibodies to oncogenic proteins of non-HPV16 HPVs in relation to head and neck
cancer. We examined the relationship between multiple HPV types (HPV6, 11, 16,
18, 31, 33, 45, 52, 58) and head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) in a
large population-based case-control study (1069 cases and 1107 controls).
Serological measures for HPV types included antibodies to L1, E6 and/or E7. In a 
secondary analysis, we excluded HPV16 seropositive subjects to examine
independent associations with other high-risk HPVs. All analyses were adjusted
for age, race, sex, education, smoking and alcohol consumption. Statistically
significant associations were observed for HPV16, 18, 33 and 52 and risk of HNSCC
after mutually adjusting for HPV types. Among HPV16 seronegative subjects,
elevated risks of HNSCC were observed for HPV18 E6 (OR = 4.19, 95% CI =
1.26-14.0), HPV33 E6 (OR = 7.96, 95% CI = 1.56-40.5) and HPV52 E7 (OR = 3.40, 95%
CI = 1.16-9.99). When examined by tumor type, associations with HPV18 and HPV33
remained statistically significant for oropharyngeal cancer, and HPV52 was
associated with oral cancer. In addition, magnitude of associations for HNSCC
increased markedly with increasing number of seropositive high-risk HPV
infections. High-risk HPV types, other than HPV16, are likely to be involved in
the etiology of HNSCC.

Â© 2014 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.28811 
PMCID: PMC4107082
PMID: 24615247  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
