

1136. Cancer Med. 2013 Dec;2(6):933-41. doi: 10.1002/cam4.151. Epub 2013 Oct 27.

Human papillomavirus DNA and p16 expression in Japanese patients with
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma.

Kawakami H(1), Okamoto I, Terao K, Sakai K, Suzuki M, Ueda S, Tanaka K, Kuwata K,
Morita Y, Ono K, Nishio K, Nishimura Y, Doi K, Nakagawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Kinki University Faculty of Medicine, 377-2
Ohno-higashi, Osaka-Sayama, Osaka, 589-8511, Japan.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a major etiologic factor for oropharyngeal squamous
cell carcinoma (OPSCC). However, little is known about HPV-related OPSCC in
Japan. During the study, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded OPSCC specimens from
Japanese patients were analyzed for HPV DNA by the polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) and for the surrogate marker p16 by immuno-histochemistry. For HPV
DNA-positive, p16-negative specimens, the methylation status of the p16 gene
promoter was examined by methylation-specific PCR. Overall survival was
calculated in relation to HPV DNA and p16 status and was subjected to
multivariate analysis. OPSCC cell lines were examined for sensitivity to
radiation or cisplatin in vitro. The study results showed that tumor specimens
from 40 (38%) of the 104 study patients contained HPV DNA, with such positivity
being associated with tumors of the tonsils, lymph node metastasis, and
nonsmoking. Overall survival was better for OPSCC patients with HPV DNA than for 
those without it (hazard ratio, 0.214; 95% confidence interval, 0.074-0.614; P = 
0.002). Multivariate analysis revealed HPV DNA to be an independent prognostic
factor for overall survival (P = 0.015). Expression of p16 was associated with
HPV DNA positivity. However, 20% of HPV DNA-positive tumors were negative for
p16, with most of these tumors manifesting DNA methylation at the p16 gene
promoter. Radiation or cisplatin sensitivity did not differ between OPSCC cell
lines positive or negative for HPV DNA. Thus, positivity for HPV DNA identifies a
distinct clinical subset of OPSCC with a more favorable outcome in Japanese.

Â© 2013 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cam4.151 
PMCID: PMC3892398
PMID: 24403267  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
