

1139. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2016 Dec 20;11:35-44. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S91018. eCollection 
2017.

Spotlight on the 9-valent HPV vaccine.

Lopalco PL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Research and New Technologies in Medicine and
Surgery, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.

Starting in 2006, vaccination against human papillomavirus (HPV) has been
progressively implemented in most developed countries. Two vaccines have been
successfully used, a bivalent vaccine targeting HPV-related cancers (bHPV) and a 
quadrivalent vaccine (qHPV) targeting both HPV-related cancers and genital warts.
Between December 2014 and June 2015, a new nonavalent HPV vaccine (9vHPV) was
granted marketing authorization in the USA and Europe. The 9vHPV was developed
from the qHPV and includes five additional HPV types that should increase the
level of protection toward HPV-related cancers. Efficacy and/or immunogenicity of
9vHPV has been assessed in eight clinical studies. The 9vHPV vaccine induced a
very robust immune response against all vaccine types, with seroconversion rates 
close to 100%. The safety profile of 9vHPV is comparable to that of qHPV. Local
reactions, especially swelling, have been more frequently reported after 9vHPV
than qHPV, and this slightly increases when the 9vHPV is coadministered with
other vaccines. The additional coverage offered by the 9vHPV may prevent a
significant proportion of HPV-related cancers (variable between 8% and 18%)
depending on the local distribution of high-risk HPV types in the population. It 
is impossible, at present, to anticipate the actual impact of the wide use of the
9vHPV in comparison with the bHPV or the qHPV, since it depends on many variables
including duration of protection, potential cross-protection toward nonvaccine
types, and herd immunity effect.

DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S91018 
PMCID: PMC5191848
PMID: 28053505  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
