

1148. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2016 Aug;140(8):844-8. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2015-0272-OA. Epub 
2016 Mar 31.

Automated Extraction of Formalin-Fixed, Paraffin-Embedded Tissue for High-Risk
Human Papillomavirus Testing of Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinomas Using the 
Roche Cobas 4800 System.

Kerr DA, Sweeney B, Arpin RN 3rd, Ring M, Pitman MB, Wilbur DC, Faquin WC(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston; and 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. Dr Kerr and Ms Sweeney contributed
equally as first authors on this manuscript.

CONTEXT: -Testing for high-risk human papillomavirus (HR-HPV) in head and neck
squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs) is important for both prognostication and
clinical management. Several testing platforms are available for HR-HPV; however,
effective alternative automated approaches are needed.
OBJECTIVE: -To assess the performance of the automated Roche cobas 4800 HPV
real-time polymerase chain reaction-based system on formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded HNSCC specimens and compare results with standard methods of in
situ hybridization (ISH) and p16 immunohistochemistry.
DESIGN: -Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded samples of HNSCC were collected from
archival specimens in the Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital
(Boston), and prepared using the automated system by deparaffinization and
dehydration followed by tissue lysis. Samples were integrated into routine
cervical cytology testing runs by cobas. Corresponding formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded samples were evaluated for HR-HPV by ISH and p16 by
immunohistochemistry. Discrepant cases were adjudicated by polymerase chain
reaction.
RESULTS: -Sixty-two HNSCC samples were analyzed using the automated cobas system,
ISH, and immunohistochemistry. Fifty-two percent (n = 32 of 62) of
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumors were positive for HR-HPV by cobas.
Eighty-eight percent (n = 28 of 32) of cases were the HPV 16 subtype and 12% (n =
4 of 32) were other HR-HPV subtypes. Corresponding testing with ISH was
concordant in 92% (n = 57 of 62) of cases. Compared with the adjudication
polymerase chain reaction standard, there were 3 false-positive cases by cobas.
CONCLUSIONS: -Concordance in HNSCC HR-HPV status between cobas and ISH was more
than 90%. The cobas demonstrated a sensitivity of 100% and a specificity of 91%
for detection of HR-HPV. Advantages favoring cobas include its automation, cost
efficiency, objective results, and ease of performance.

DOI: 10.5858/arpa.2015-0272-OA 
PMID: 27031775  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
