

1149. Virus Res. 2017 Mar 2;231:148-165. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2016.12.002. Epub 2016
Dec 6.

The current state of therapeutic and T cell-based vaccines against human
papillomaviruses.

Yang A(1), Farmer E(1), Lin J(1), Wu TC(2), Hung CF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD USA;
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 
USA; Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD USA; Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD USA;
Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD USA. Electronic
address: chung2@jhmi.edu.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) is known to be a necessary factor for many gynecologic
malignancies and is also associated with a subset of head and neck malignancies. 
This knowledge has created the opportunity to control these HPV-associated
cancers through vaccination. However, despite the availability of prophylactic
HPV vaccines, HPV infections remain extremely common worldwide. In addition,
while prophylactic HPV vaccines have been effective in preventing infection, they
are ineffective at clearing pre-existing HPV infections. Thus, there is an urgent
need for therapeutic and T cell-based vaccines to treat existing HPV infections
and HPV-associated lesions and cancers. Unlike prophylactic vaccines, which
generate neutralizing antibodies, therapeutic, and T cell-based vaccines enhance 
cell-mediated immunity against HPV antigens. Our review will cover various
therapeutic and T cell-based vaccines in development for the treatment of
HPV-associated diseases. Furthermore, we review the strategies to enhance the
efficacy of therapeutic vaccines and the latest clinical trials on therapeutic
and T cell-based HPV vaccines.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2016.12.002 
PMCID: PMC5325765
PMID: 27932207  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
