

115. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol). 2016 Jul;28(7):467-74. doi:
10.1016/j.clon.2016.03.001. Epub 2016 Apr 1.

Biological Features of Human Papillomavirus-related Head and Neck Cancers
Contributing to Improved Response.

Cleary C(1), Leeman JE(1), Higginson DS(1), Katabi N(2), Sherman E(3), Morris
L(4), McBride S(1), Lee N(5), Riaz N(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY,
USA.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY,
USA.
(5)Department of Radiation Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, NY, USA. Electronic address: leen2@mskcc.org.
(6)Department of Radiation Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, NY, USA. Electronic address: riazn@mskcc.org.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) are the sixth most common
malignancy globally, and an increasing proportion of oropharyngeal HNSCCs are
associated with the human papillomavirus (HPV). Patients with HPV-associated
tumours have markedly improved overall and disease-specific survival compared
with their HPV-negative counterparts when treated with chemoradiation. Although
the difference in outcomes between these two groups is clearly established, the
mechanism underlying these differences remains an area of investigation. Data
from preclinical, clinical and genomics studies have started to suggest that an
increase in radio-sensitivity of HPV-positive HNSCC may be responsible for
improved outcomes, the putative mechanisms of which we will review here. The
Cancer Genome Atlas and others have recently documented a multitude of molecular 
differences between HPV-positive and HPV-negative tumours. Preclinical
investigations by multiple groups have explored possible mechanisms of increased 
sensitivity to therapy, including examining differences in DNA repair, hypoxia
and the immune response. In addition to differences in the response to therapy,
some groups have started to investigate phenotypic differences between the two
diseases, such as tumour invasiveness. Finally, we will conclude with a brief
review of ongoing clinical trials that are attempting to de-escalate treatment to
minimise long-term toxicity while maintaining cure rates. New insights from
preclinical and genomic studies may eventually lead to personalised treatment
paradigms for HPV-positive patients.

Copyright Â© 2016 The Royal College of Radiologists. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clon.2016.03.001 
PMCID: PMC5512583
PMID: 27052795  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
