

116. Cancer Sci. 2014 Apr;105(4):409-17. doi: 10.1111/cas.12369. Epub 2014 Mar 30.

Human papillomavirus and p53 mutations in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
among Japanese population.

Maruyama H(1), Yasui T, Ishikawa-Fujiwara T, Morii E, Yamamoto Y, Yoshii T,
Takenaka Y, Nakahara S, Todo T, Hongyo T, Inohara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, Osaka University
Faculty of Medicine, Suita, Japan.

We aimed to reveal the prevalence and pattern of human papillomavirus (HPV)
infection and p53 mutations among Japanese head and neck squamous cell carcinoma 
(HNSCC) patients in relation to clinicopathological parameters. Human
papillomavirus DNA and p53 mutations were examined in 493 HNSCCs and its subset
of 283 HNSCCs. Oropharyngeal carcinoma was more frequently HPV-positive than
non-oropharyngeal carcinoma (34.4% vs 3.6%, P < 0.001), and HPV16 accounted for
91.1% of HPV-positive tumors. In oropharyngeal carcinoma, which showed an
increasing trend of HPV prevalence over time (P < 0.001), HPV infection was
inversely correlated with tobacco smoking, alcohol drinking, p53 mutations, and a
disruptive mutation (P = 0.003, <0.001, <0.001, and <0.001, respectively). The
prevalence of p53 mutations differed significantly between virus-unrelated HNSCC 
and virus-related HNSCC consisting of nasopharyngeal and HPV-positive
oropharyngeal carcinomas (48.3% vs 7.1%, P < 0.001). Although p53 mutations were 
associated with tobacco smoking and alcohol drinking, this association
disappeared in virus-unrelated HNSCC. A disruptive mutation was never found in
virus-related HNSCC, whereas it was independently associated with primary site,
such as the oropharynx and hypopharynx (P = 0.01 and 0.03, respectively), in
virus-unrelated HNSCC. Moreover, in virus-unrelated HNSCC, G:C to T:A
transversions were more frequent in ever-smokers than in never-smokers (P =
0.04), whereas G:C to A:T transitions at CpG sites were less frequent in
ever-smokers than in never-smokers (P = 0.04). In conclusion, HNSCC is
etiologically classified into virus-related and virus-unrelated subgroups. In
virus-related HNSCC, p53 mutations are uncommon with the absence of a disruptive 
mutation, whereas in virus-unrelated HNSCC, p53 mutations are common, and
disruptive mutagenesis of p53 is related with oropharyngeal and hypopharyngeal
carcinoma.

Â© 2014 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.12369 
PMCID: PMC4317800
PMID: 24521534  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
