

1161. J Med Virol. 2015 May;87(5):860-70. doi: 10.1002/jmv.24124. Epub 2015 Feb 3.

Reliable detection of human papillomavirus in recurrent laryngeal papillomatosis 
and associated carcinoma of archival tissue.

Weiss D(1), Heinkele T, Rudack C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University of
Münster, Germany.

Recurrent laryngeal papillomatosis (RLP) is, although benign, a challenging
disease for both, the patient and the treating physician. Maximum disease control
with minimum intervention is considered to be the gold standard. However,
patients have to undergo repeating surgical interventions. Human papillomavirus
(HPV), mainly so called low risk types, are thought to be responsible for the
development of RLP. But, there is still some controversy over the true prevalence
of HPV and the virus-specific molecular diagnostic of choice. Therefore archival 
tissue samples from 44 patients with RLP at laryngeal site, out of which eight
developed laryngeal cancer, was screened for presence of HPV through various
molecular approaches. Results from these different methodologies were compared
between each other and with patient's characteristics. The overall detection
rates of HPV with the various methods used in this study were: HPV16 E6/E7 PCR:
0%; GP5+/6+ PCR: 4.5%; CDKN2A/p16 immunohistochemistry: 6.8%; in-situ
hybridization for low and high risk HPV types: 52.3%; HPV6/11 L1 PCR: 72.7% and
HPV6/11 E6 PCR: 79.5%. Disease progression showed no apparent dependence of the
detected HPV type or clinical variables like age at diagnosis, sex, or additional
drug application (Cidofovir and Bevacizumab). In conclusion, the broad-spectrum
PCRs alone or in combination with immunohistochemistry of CDKN2A/p16 and in-situ 
hybridization are unsuitable for HPV detection in RLP. Based on the findings
presented in this study the type specific PCRs targeting the E6 open reading
frame are clearly superior in detection of HPV in this tumor entity.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.24124 
PMID: 25650265  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
