

1164. J Med Virol. 2017 Jun;89(6):1088-1095. doi: 10.1002/jmv.24737. Epub 2016 Dec 5.

EBV infection is prevalent in the adenoid and palatine tonsils in adults.

Seishima N(1), Kondo S(1), Wakisaka N(1), Kobayashi E(1), Imoto T(1),
Moriyama-Kita M(1), Nakanishi Y(1), Endo K(1), Murono S(1), Sugimoto H(1), Hatano
M(1), Ueno T(1), Yoshizaki T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Graduate School of Medical
Science, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is associated with the pathogenesis of several diseases 
in both adults and children. However, there have been no reports on the
prevalence and amount of EBV in the adenoids of adults; thus, it is important to 
investigate these in the adenoids and tonsils of adults and children. In this
study, 67 patients who underwent tonsillectomy or adenotonsillectomy were
included and divided into two groups: adults aged ≥ 16 years (n = 35) and
children aged <16 years (n = 32). Patients' adenoid and tonsil tissues were
analyzed using quantitative polymerase chain reaction for EBV DNA. EBV was
detected in 26 (74%) adenoids and 25 (71%) tonsils among the adult group and was 
detected 21 (66%) adenoids and 20 (63%) tonsils in the child group. There was no 
significant difference in EBV DNA prevalence between the adenoids and tonsils for
each group. However, there was a significant correlation between EBV DNA load in 
the adenoids and tonsils of the same individual in both groups (r = 0.579,
P < 0.01, adult group; r = 0.919, P < 0.01, child group). In conclusion, EBV
infection is prevalent in the adenoids and tonsils in adults and children. These 
results indicate that EBV continuously reside in the nasopharyngeal region after 
primal infection and may develop several diseases.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.24737 
PMID: 27864888  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
