

1169. Mod Pathol. 2013 Feb;26(2):223-31. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2012.159. Epub 2012 Sep
21.

Detection and significance of human papillomavirus, CDKN2A(p16) and CDKN1A(p21)
expression in squamous cell carcinoma of the larynx.

Chernock RD(1), Wang X, Gao G, Lewis JS Jr, Zhang Q, Thorstad WL, El-Mofty SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Although a strong etiologic relationship between human papillomavirus (HPV) and a
majority of oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas has been established, the role
of HPV in non-oropharyngeal head and neck carcinomas is much less clear. Here, we
investigated the prevalence and clinicopathologic significance of HPV and its
reported biomarkers, CDKN2A(p16) and CDKN1A(p21), in laryngeal squamous cell
carcinomas in patients treated either with primary surgery and postoperative
radiation or with definitive radiation-based therapy. Nearly all of 76 tumors
were keratinizing and none displayed the nonkeratinizing morphology that is
typically associated with HPV infection in the oropharynx. However, CDKN2A(p16)
immunohistochemistry was positive in 21 cases (28%) and CDKN1A(p21) in 34 (45%). 
CDKN2A(p16) and CDKN1A(p21) status strongly correlated with each other
(P=0.0038). Yet, only four cases were HPV positive by DNA in situ hybridization
or by reverse transcriptase PCR E6/E7 mRNA (all four were CDKN2A(p16) and
CDKN1A(p21) positive). Unexpectedly, 9 additional tumors out of 20 CDKN2A(p16)
positive cases harbored high-risk HPV DNA by PCR. For further investigation of
this unexpected result, in situ hybridization for E6/E7 mRNA was performed on
these nine cases and all were negative, confirming the absence of
transcriptionally active virus. Patients with CDKN1A(p21)-positive tumors did
have better overall survival (69% at 3 years) than those with
CDKN1A(p21)-negative tumors (51% at 3 years) (P=0.045). There was also a strong
trend towards better overall survival in the CDKN2A(p16)-positive group
(P=0.058). Thus, it appears that the role of HPV is more complex in the larynx
than in the oropharynx, and that CDKN2A(p16) and CDKN1A(p21) expression may not
reflect HPV-driven tumors in most cases. Because of this, CDKN2A(p16) should not 
be used as a definitive surrogate marker of HPV-driven tumors in the larynx.

DOI: 10.1038/modpathol.2012.159 
PMCID: PMC3529982
PMID: 22996374  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
