

1171. Int J Cancer. 2016 Feb 15;138(4):912-7. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29827. Epub 2015 Sep 14.

No role for human papillomavirus infection in oral cancers in a region in
southern India.

Laprise C(1)(2), Madathil SA(2)(3), Allison P(1)(2), Abraham P(4), Raghavendran
A(4), Shahul HP(2), ThekkePurakkal AS(2), Castonguay G(2), Coutlée F(5), Schlecht
NF(6), Rousseau MC(2)(3), Franco EL(1)(2), Nicolau B(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology, Department of Oncology, McGill University,
Montreal, QC, Canada.
(2)Division of Oral Health and Society, Faculty of Dentistry, McGill University, 
Montreal, QC, Canada.
(3)Epidemiology and Biostatistics Unit, INRS-Institut Armand-Frappier, Laval, QC,
Canada.
(4)Department of Clinical Virology, Christian Medical College, Vellore, India.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Hôpital Notre-Dame Du
Centre De Recherche Du Centre Hospitalier De L'université De Montréal, Montreal, 
QC, Canada.
(6)Department of Epidemiology and Population Health, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, New York, NY.

Oral cancer is a major public health issue in India with ∼ 77,000 new cases and
52,000 deaths yearly. Paan chewing, tobacco and alcohol use are strong risk
factors for this cancer in India. Human papillomaviruses (HPVs) are also related 
to a subset of head and neck cancers (HNCs). We examined the association between 
oral HPV and oral cancer in a sample of Indian subjects participating in a
hospital-based case-control study. We recruited incident oral cancer cases (N =
350) and controls frequency-matched by age and sex (N = 371) from two main
referral hospitals in Kerala, South India. Sociodemographic and behavioral data
were collected by interviews. Epithelial cells were sampled using Oral CDx®
brushes from the oral cancer site and the normal mucosa. Detection and genotyping
of 36 HPV genotypes were done using a polymerase chain reaction protocol. Data
collection procedures were performed by qualified dentists via a detailed
protocol with strict quality control, including independent HPV testing in India 
and Canada. HPV DNA was detected in none of the cases or controls. Associations
between oral cancer and risk factors usually associated with HPV infection, such 
as oral sex and number of lifetime sexual partners, were examined by logistic
regression and were not associated with oral cancer. Lack of a role for HPV
infection in this study may reflect cultural or religious characteristics
specific to this region in India that are not conducive to oral HPV transmission.
A nationwide representative prevalence study is needed to investigate HPV
prevalence variability among Indian regions.

© 2015 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.29827 
PMID: 26317688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
