

1173. Clin Cancer Res. 2017 Jul 15;23(14):3884-3895. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-16-2936. Epub 2017 Jan 31.

Role of Host miRNA Hsa-miR-139-3p in HPV-16-Induced Carcinomas.

Sannigrahi MK(1), Sharma R(2), Singh V(1), Panda NK(1), Rattan V(3), Khullar
M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and
Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh, India.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine and Biotechnology, PGIMER, Chandigarh,
India.
(3)Unit of Oral Health Sciences, PGIMER, Chandigarh, India.
(4)Department of Experimental Medicine and Biotechnology, PGIMER, Chandigarh,
India. khullar.madhu@pgimer.edu.

Purpose: Human papillomavirus 16 (HPV-16) is an important risk factor in head and
neck cancer (HNC). Studies suggest that miRNAs play an important role in cancer; 
however, their role in HPV-mediated oncogenesis remains largely unknown. We
investigated the role of miRNAs with HPV-16 as putative target in HPV-16-mediated
cancers.Experimental Design: Using in silico tools, we identified miRNAs with
putative binding sequences on HPV-16 miRNAs. Hsa-miR-139-3p was identified as
best candidate miRNA by luciferase reporter assay and was found to be
significantly downregulated in HPV-16-positive tissues and cell lines.
Overexpression/inhibition studies were performed to determine the role of miRNA
in regulating oncogenic pathways.Results: Hsa-miR-139-3p was found to target
high-risk HPV-16 oncogenic proteins and revive major tumor suppressor proteins
(p53, p21, and p16). This resulted in inhibition of cell proliferation and cell
migration, cell-cycle arrest at G2-M phase and increased cell death of
HPV-16-positive cells. Analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data showed
decreased expression of Hsa-miR-139-3p in HPV-16-positive HNC and cervical cancer
cases, and its higher expression correlated with better survival outcome in both 
cases. Increased DNA methylation of Hsa-miR-139-3p harboring gene PDE2A at its
promoter/CpG islands was observed in HPV-16-positive tissues and cell lines,
which further correlated with Hsa-miR-139-3p expression, suggesting its role in
regulating Hsa-miR-139-3p expression. Furthermore, we observed an increased
sensitization of Hsa-miR-139-3p overexpressed HPV-16-positive cells to
chemotherapeutic drugs (cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil).Conclusions:
HPV-16-mediated downregulation of Hsa-miR-139-3p may promote oncogenesis in HNC
and cervical cancer. Clin Cancer Res; 23(14); 3884-95. ©2017 AACR.

©2017 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-16-2936 
PMID: 28143871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
