

1174. Gene Ther. 2014 Jan;21(1):71-80. doi: 10.1038/gt.2013.59. Epub 2013 Nov 14.

Virally expressed connexin26 restores gap junction function in the cochlea of
conditional Gjb2 knockout mice.

Yu Q(1), Wang Y(2), Chang Q(3), Wang J(3), Gong S(4), Li H(2), Lin X(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Otolaryngology Head & Neck Surgery, Beijing Tongren Hospital,
Capital Medical University, Beijing, China [2] Department of Otolaryngology,
Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, Eye & ENT Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
GA, USA.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology Head & Neck Surgery, Beijing Tongren Hospital,
Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.

Mutations in GJB2, which codes for the gap junction (GJ) protein connexin26
(Cx26), are the most common causes of human nonsyndromic hereditary deafness. We 
inoculated modified adeno-associated viral (AAV) vectors into the scala media of 
early postnatal conditional Gjb2 knockout mice to drive exogenous Cx26
expression. We found extensive virally expressed Cx26 in cells lining the scala
media, and intercellular GJ network was re-established in the organ of Corti of
mutant mouse cochlea. Widespread ectopic Cx26 expression neither formed ectopic
GJs nor affected normal hearing thresholds in wild-type (WT) mice, suggesting
that autonomous cellular mechanisms regulate proper membrane trafficking of
exogenously expressed Cx26 and govern the functional manifestation of them.
Functional recovery of GJ-mediated coupling among the supporting cells was
observed. We found that both cell death in the organ of Corti and degeneration of
spiral ganglion neurons in the cochlea of mutant mice were substantially reduced,
although auditory brainstem responses did not show significant hearing
improvement. This is the first report demonstrating that virally mediated gene
therapy restored extensive GJ intercellular network among cochlear non-sensory
cells in vivo. Such a treatment performed at early postnatal stages resulted in a
partial rescue of disease phenotypes in the cochlea of the mutant mice.

DOI: 10.1038/gt.2013.59 
PMCID: PMC3881370
PMID: 24225640  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
