

1175. Clin Cancer Res. 2017 Aug 15;23(16):4897-4907. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-17-0103. Epub 2017 Apr 25.

Characterization of the T-Cell Receptor Repertoire and Immune Microenvironment in
Patients with Locoregionally Advanced Squamous Cell Carcinoma of the Head and
Neck.

Saloura V(1), Fatima A(2), Zewde M(2), Kiyotani K(2), Brisson R(2), Park JH(2),
Ikeda Y(2), Vougiouklakis T(2), Bao R(3), Khattri A(2), Seiwert T(2), Cipriani
N(4), Lingen M(4), Vokes E(2), Nakamura Y(2)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
vsaloura@bsd.uchicago.edu.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(3)Center for Research Bioinformatics, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(5)Department of Surgery, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.

Purpose: Squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN) is a lethal cancer 
with a suboptimal 5-year overall survival of approximately 50% with surgery
and/or definitive chemoradiotherapy. Novel treatments are thus urgently awaited. 
Immunotherapy with checkpoint blockade has emerged as a promising option for
patients with recurrent/metastatic SCCHN; however, it has not been investigated
in the curative-intent setting yet. The purpose of this study was to investigate 
the T-cell receptor repertoire and the tumor microenvironment in tumor tissues of
SCCHN patients with locoregionally advanced disease.Experimental Design: We
performed T-cell receptor sequencing of tumor tissues from 44 patients with
locoregionally advanced SCCHN prior to treatment with definitive
chemoradiotherapy and correlated the T-cell clonality and the mRNA expression
levels of immune-related genes with clinicopathologic parameters.Results: Clonal 
expansion of T cells was significantly higher in human papilloma virus
(HPV)-negative compared with HPV-positive tumors, signifying more robust antigen 
presentation in HPV-negative tumors. The latter was supported by the higher
percentage of HPV-negative tumors expressing HLA-A protein compared with
HPV-positive tumors (P = 0.049). Higher GRZB levels correlated significantly with
longer recurrence-free survival (log-rank, P = 0.003) independent of tumor size, 
nodal stage, and HPV status.Conclusions: Our findings support clonal expansion of
T cells in SCCHN patients with locoregionally advanced disease and imply
differences in the antigen presentation capacity between HPV-negative and
HPV-positive tumors. Elevated GRZB mRNA levels may also serve as a favorable and 
independent predictor of outcome in SCCHN patients treated with
chemoradiotherapy. These data provide rationale for the introduction of
immunotherapeutic approaches in the curative-intent setting. Clin Cancer Res;
23(16); 4897-907. ©2017 AACR.

©2017 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-17-0103 
PMID: 28442504  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
