

1176. Cancer Res. 2013 Mar 15;73(6):1733-41. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-2384. Epub
2013 Jan 3.

Evidence for a role of the PD-1:PD-L1 pathway in immune resistance of
HPV-associated head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Lyford-Pike S(1), Peng S, Young GD, Taube JM, Westra WH, Akpeng B, Bruno TC,
Richmon JD, Wang H, Bishop JA, Chen L, Drake CG, Topalian SL, Pardoll DM, Pai SI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Sidney Kimmel
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Human papillomavirus-associated head and neck squamous cell carcinomas
(HPV-HNSCC) originate in the tonsils, the major lymphoid organ that orchestrates 
immunity to oral infections. Despite its location, the virus escapes immune
elimination during malignant transformation and progression. Here, we provide
evidence for the role of the PD-1:PD-L1 pathway in HPV-HNSCC immune resistance.
We show membranous expression of PD-L1 in the tonsillar crypts, the site of
initial HPV infection. In HPV-HNSCCs that are highly infiltrated with
lymphocytes, PD-L1 expression on both tumor cells and CD68+ tumor-associated
macrophages is geographically localized to sites of lymphocyte fronts, whereas
the majority of CD8+ tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes express high levels of PD-1, 
the inhibitory PD-L1 receptor. Significant levels of mRNA for IFN-Î³, a major
cytokine inducer of PD-L1 expression, were found in HPV+ PD-L1(+) tumors. Our
findings support the role of the PD-1:PD-L1 interaction in creating an
"immune-privileged" site for initial viral infection and subsequent adaptive
immune resistance once tumors are established and suggest a rationale for
therapeutic blockade of this pathway in patients with HPV-HNSCC.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-2384 
PMCID: PMC3602406
PMID: 23288508  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
