

1177. Cancer Res. 2015 Feb 1;75(3):480-6. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3124. Epub 2015
Jan 14.

Novel insights into head and neck cancer using next-generation "omic"
technologies.

Sepiashvili L(1), Bruce JP(2), Huang SH(3), O'Sullivan B(3), Liu FF(4), Kislinger
T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. Princess Margaret Cancer Center, University Health Network, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.
(2)Princess Margaret Cancer Center, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.
(4)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. Princess Margaret Cancer Center, University Health Network, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada. Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. thomas.kislinger@utoronto.ca Fei-Fei.Liu@rmp.uhn.on.ca.
(5)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. Princess Margaret Cancer Center, University Health Network, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada. thomas.kislinger@utoronto.ca Fei-Fei.Liu@rmp.uhn.on.ca.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is a highly heterogeneous disease
that develops via one of the two primary carcinogenic routes: chemical
carcinogenesis through exposure to tobacco and alcohol or virally induced
tumorigenesis. Human papillomavirus (HPV)-positive (HPV(+)) and HPV-negative
(HPV(-)) HNSCCs represent distinct clinical entities, with the latter associated 
with significantly inferior outcome. The biologic basis of these different
outcomes is an area of intense investigation; their therapeutic regimens are
currently also being reevaluated, which would be significantly facilitated by
reliable biomarkers for stratification. With the advent of the omics era and
accelerated development of targeted therapies, there are unprecedented
opportunities to address the challenges in the management of HNSCC. As summarized
herein, side-by-side molecular characterization of HPV(+) versus HPV(-) HNSCC has
revealed distinct molecular landscapes, novel prognostic signatures, and
potentially targetable biologic pathways. In particular, we focus on the evidence
acquired from genome-wide omics pertinent to our understanding of the clinical
behavior of HNSCC and on insights into personalized treatment opportunities.
Integrating, mining, and validating these data toward clinically meaningful
outcomes for patients with HNSCC in conjunction with systematic verification of
the functional relevance of these findings are critical steps toward the design
of personalized therapies.

Â©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3124 
PMID: 25589349  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
