

118. Hum Gene Ther. 2011 Sep;22(9):1101-8. doi: 10.1089/hum.2010.172. Epub 2011 Apr
18.

Lister vaccine strain of vaccinia virus armed with the endostatin-angiostatin
fusion gene: an oncolytic virus superior to dl1520 (ONYX-015) for human head and 
neck cancer.

Tysome JR(1), Wang P, Alusi G, Briat A, Gangeswaran R, Wang J, Bhakta V, Fodor I,
Lemoine NR, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Oncology, Barts Cancer Institute, Barts and the London
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary of London, London EC1M 6BQ, United
Kingdom.

Oncolytic viral therapy represents a promising strategy for the treatment of head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), with dl1520 (ONYX-015) the most widely 
used oncolytic adenovirus in clinical trials. This study aimed to determine the
effectiveness of the Lister vaccine strain of vaccinia virus as well as a
vaccinia virus armed with the endostatin-angiostatin fusion gene (VVhEA) as a
novel therapy for HNSCC and to compare them with dl1520. The potency and
replication of the Lister strain and VVhEA and the expression and function of the
fusion protein were determined in human HNSCC cells in vitro and in vivo.
Finally, the efficacy of VVhEA was compared with dl1520 in vivo in a human HNSCC 
model. The Lister vaccine strain of vaccinia virus was more effective than the
adenovirus against all HNSCC cell lines tested in vitro. Although the potency of 
VVhEA was attenuated in vitro, the expression and function of the
endostatin-angiostatin fusion protein was confirmed in HNSCC models both in vitro
and in vivo. This novel vaccinia virus (VVhEA) demonstrated superior antitumor
potency in vivo compared with both dl1520 and the control vaccinia virus. This
study suggests that the Lister strain vaccinia virus armed with an
endostatin-angiostatin fusion gene may be a potential therapeutic agent for
HNSCC.

DOI: 10.1089/hum.2010.172 
PMID: 21361787  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
