

1183. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 Sep;37(9):1349-56. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e318290427d.

Papillary squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck: clinicopathologic and
molecular features with special reference to human papillomavirus.

Mehrad M(1), Carpenter DH, Chernock RD, Wang H, Ma XJ, Luo Y, Luo J, Lewis JS Jr,
El-Mofty SK.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology and Immunology †Department of Otolaryngology Head
and Neck Surgery §Division of Biostatistics, Washington University School of
Medicine, St Louis, MO ‡Advanced Cell Diagnostics Inc., Hayward, CA.

A relationship between human papillomavirus (HPV) infection and papillary
squamous cell carcinoma (PSCC) has been suggested. However, to date, no studies
have thoroughly and directly evaluated for transcriptional activity of the virus 
or the clinicopathologic significance of HPV-positive PSCC. Forty-eight cases of 
PSCC were retrieved from our surgical pathology database and were reviewed by 4
study pathologists, with tumors defined as SCC with a significant component of
papillary growth in the tumor. Immunohistochemical analysis for p16 and p53 was
performed. Overexpression of p16 was used as a surrogate marker of
transcriptionally active HPV. Transcriptional activity was also directly
evaluated using RNA in situ hybridization to detect high-risk HPV E6/E7 mRNA.
Clinical follow-up data were obtained by chart review. Seven cases were located
in the oral cavity, 19 in the oropharynx, and 22 in the larynx. Two morphologic
types of PSCC were identified: keratinizing type, in which the epithelial cells
showed a maturation trend with minimal surface parakeratin, and nonkeratinizing
type, in which the papillae were completely covered by immature basaloid cells.
Transcriptionally active HPV was present in 23 of 43 (53.4%) tumors. The majority
of tumors harboring transcriptionally active HPV arose in the oropharynx, showed 
nonkeratinizing morphology, were p16 positive, and p53 negative.
Transcriptionally active HPV was also present in many laryngeal and oral cavity
PSCCs. Overall survival, disease-specific survival, and disease-free survival
were favorable and did not significantly differ by anatomic subsite. However,
HPV-related tumors showed a trend toward better survival.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e318290427d 
PMCID: PMC3903508
PMID: 23797720  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
