

1186. Orv Hetil. 2017 Aug;158(31):1213-1221. doi: 10.1556/650.2017.30807.

[Human papillomavirus associated cervix uteri morbidity in Hungary: epidemiology 
and correlation with the HPV types and the simultaneous cytological diagnosis].

[Article in Hungarian]

Szentirmay Z(1), Veleczki Z(1), Kásler M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Országos Onkológiai Intézet Budapest, Ráth György u. 7-9., 1122.

INTRODUCTION: Persistent infection of human papillomavirus is known to cause
cervical intraepithelial neoplasia or cancer in the cervix uteri and other
HPV-associated cancers in different localization. Based on epidemiological and
biological data, principally the high risk HPV is responsible for development of 
cervical these cancers. However, we have no information about the frequently
distribution of different HPV types and what is the correlation between the HPV
types and cytological diagnosis in cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN).
AIM: In this paper, we are going to present new data involving incidence and
mortality of HPV-associated cancers during the period of 2009-2015 in Hungary. We
are also going to investigate the correlation of cervical cytological diagnosis
and HPV typing, and the preventive effect of HPV vaccination.
METHOD: The epidemiological data spring from the National Cancer Registry. HPV
typing was performed by Linear Array HPV Genotyping Test. Simultaneous
cytological diagnosis and HPV typing was carried out on 2048 cytological samples 
collected in period of 2009-2016.
RESULTS: According to the epidemiologic data, the most frequently occurring
HPV-associated cancer is the laryngeal carcinoma in man, and the cervical cancer 
in woman in Hungary. During the 2009-2015 time intervals, the frequency
distribution of head and neck cancers was not changed in man, but the incidence
of tongue root squamous cell carcinomas was gradually increasing in woman. We
have defined the clinical significance of single and simultaneously multiple HPV 
infection and have investigated the correlation of the HPV frequency distribution
and cytological diagnosis in CIN. It was found that in the cytological negativity
of probably/possibly carcinogen pHR-HPV group classified by IACR was much more
frequent as in HR-HPV group (56% versus 47%). The presence of simultaneous
multiplex HPV infection betokens an increased cancer risk. According to the
international publications, the ratio of HPV16 just twice as big as in cervical
cancer, what we found in CIN (60% versus 30%). The frequency order of the HPV18
is 2nd in cancer, and 9th in CIN. Comparing the frequency distribution of
HR/pHR-HPVs in cervical cancer and CIN, the HR-HPV35 is very rarely occurring in 
CIN, the pHR-HPV56, 66, and 73 is more frequently seen in CIN as in carcinoma.
Appreciated the preventive value of anti-HPV vaccines, we have found a
significant differences in group with 1 HPV/sample and in group with more than 1 
HPV/sample.
CONCLUSION: The frequency distribution of tongue root squamous cell carcinoma and
cervical cancer was gradually increasing in woman. The overall preventive effect 
of 9-valent vaccine is 80.3%. This preventive value should be higher because of
the transformation ability of the different HPV types is not same. Out of
consideration for HPV incidence in cancer, the preventive effect of 9-valent or
4-valent vaccines might reach to 93% or 73%. However, the pHR-HPVs are
biologically active, it is not sufficient for the inclusion of these HPV types
into population-wide HPV-DNA based cervical screening programs. Orv Hetil. 2017; 
158(31): 1213-1221.

DOI: 10.1556/650.2017.30807 
PMID: 28758434  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
