

1187. J Virol. 2014 Oct;88(20):11965-72. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01879-14. Epub 2014 Aug 6.

Inactivation of the human papillomavirus E6 or E7 gene in cervical carcinoma
cells by using a bacterial CRISPR/Cas RNA-guided endonuclease.

Kennedy EM(1), Kornepati AV(1), Goldstein M(2), Bogerd HP(1), Poling BC(1),
Whisnant AW(1), Kastan MB(2), Cullen BR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA bryan.cullen@duke.edu.

High-risk human papillomaviruses (HPVs), including HPV-16 and HPV-18, are the
causative agents of cervical carcinomas and are linked to several other tumors of
the anogenital and oropharyngeal regions. The majority of HPV-induced tumors
contain integrated copies of the normally episomal HPV genome that invariably
retain intact forms of the two HPV oncogenes E6 and E7. E6 induces degradation of
the cellular tumor suppressor p53, while E7 destabilizes the retinoblastoma (Rb) 
protein. Previous work has shown that loss of E6 function in cervical cancer
cells induces p53 expression as well as downstream effectors that induce
apoptosis and cell cycle arrest. Similarly, loss of E7 allows increased Rb
expression, leading to cell cycle arrest and senescence. Here, we demonstrate
that expression of a bacterial Cas9 RNA-guided endonuclease, together with single
guide RNAs (sgRNAs) specific for E6 or E7, is able to induce cleavage of the HPV 
genome, resulting in the introduction of inactivating deletion and insertion
mutations into the E6 or E7 gene. This results in the induction of p53 or Rb,
leading to cell cycle arrest and eventual cell death. Both HPV-16- and
HPV-18-transformed cells were found to be responsive to targeted HPV
genome-specific DNA cleavage. These data provide a proof of principle for the
idea that vector-delivered Cas9/sgRNA combinations could represent effective
treatment modalities for HPV-induced cancers. Importance: Human papillomaviruses 
(HPVs) are the causative agents of almost all cervical carcinomas and many other 
tumors, including many head and neck cancers. In these cancer cells, the HPV DNA 
genome is integrated into the cellular genome, where it expresses high levels of 
two viral oncogenes, called E6 and E7, that are required for cancer cell growth
and viability. Here, we demonstrate that the recently described bacterial
CRISPR/Cas RNA-guided endonuclease can be reprogrammed to target and destroy the 
E6 or E7 gene in cervical carcinoma cells transformed by HPV, resulting in cell
cycle arrest, leading to cancer cell death. We propose that viral vectors
designed to deliver E6- and/or E7-specific CRISPR/Cas to tumor cells could
represent a novel and highly effective tool to treat and eliminate HPV-induced
cancers.

Copyright Â© 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01879-14 
PMCID: PMC4178730
PMID: 25100830  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
