

1190. J Nucl Med. 2014 Mar;55(3):431-8. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.113.125542. Epub 2014 Jan
9.

PET/CT imaging and human papilloma virus-positive oropharyngeal squamous cell
cancer: evolving clinical imaging paradigm.

Subramaniam RM(1), Alluri KC, Tahari AK, Aygun N, Quon H.

Author information: 
(1)Russell H. Morgan Department of Radiology and Radiological Sciences, Johns
Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.

Human papillomavirus (HPV)-positive oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC)
represents an emerging disease that differs from HPV-negative OPSCC in natural
history and prognosis. Contrast-enhanced PET/CT is essential to accurately stage 
the primary site when there are smaller tumors; neck nodal metastases, which tend
to have a more cystic component; and distant metastases that manifest in unusual 
sites (disseminating phenotype) such as bones and other solid organs, including
brain. Metastases tend to appear later in the disease course during follow-up for
HPV-positive OPSCC than for HPV-negative OPSCC. Because HPV-positive OPSCC
patients have a better clinical outcome, there is a need for treatment
deintensification to spare the patient from treatment-related toxicities.
(18)F-FDG PET/CT would play a role in monitoring patients with deintensified
treatments to ensure that no adverse outcome is introduced. The better prognosis 
and outcome of HPV-positive OPSCC patients would warrant imaging follow-up that
is less intense but continues longer because of the manifestation of distant
metastases later in the disease course and at unusual sites. All these clinical
paradigms facilitate a definite role for PET/CT imaging in the management of
HPV-positive OPSCC.

DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.113.125542 
PMID: 24408893  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
