

1194. Int J Cancer. 2013 Sep 15;133(6):1389-99. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28142. Epub 2013 Mar
29.

Identification of oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas with active HPV16
involvement by immunohistochemical analysis of the retinoblastoma protein
pathway.

Holzinger D(1), Flechtenmacher C, Henfling N, Kaden I, Grabe N, Lahrmann B,
Schmitt M, Hess J, Pawlita M, Bosch FX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Experimental Head and Neck Oncology, Head and
Neck Surgery, Heidelberg University, Germany. d.holzinger@dkfz.de

Viral oncogene RNA expression is regarded as reliable biomarker to identify
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas (OPSCC) with active HPV16 involvement.
This study addressed whether the expression profile of the cellular proteins
p16(INK4a), pRb, Cyclin D1 and p53 provide surrogate marker combinations that
identify OPSCC with active HPV16 in situations where only formalin-fixed biopsies
are available. Protein expression was analyzed by immunohistochemistry on tissue 
microarrays created from 188 OPSCC of which the HPV16 DNA and RNA status had been
established previously from snap-frozen biopsies. Associations of single markers 
and of marker combinations with HPV16 DNA, viral RNA expression patterns and
overall survival as primary end point were evaluated by statistical analysis.
Most tumors with active HPV16 involvement (RNA(+) group; n = 40) showed a
specific protein pattern, that is, high p16(INK4a) (80%), low pRb (85%), low
Cyclin D1 (95%) and normal p53 (73%). This pattern was significantly different
from the pattern observed in HPV DNA-negative tumors (HPV(-) group) and in HPV16 
DNA-positive tumors lacking viral RNA expression patterns (RNA(-) group). The
combination of high p16(INK4a) and low pRb levels was distinctly superior to
p16(INK4a) alone; it was strongly associated with RNA(+) tumors (OR 41.4, 95%CI
10.7-162.5), with improved survival (HR 0.37, 95%CI 0.2-0.8) and had best
predictive values (78% sensitivity, 93% specificity, 78% PPV, 93% NPV). In
conclusion, if only formalin-fixed biopsy material is available, the marker
combination high p16(INK4a) /low pRb is well suited to identify OPSCC with
biologically active HPV16 which represent a distinct OPSCC entity with improved
prognosis.

Copyright Â© 2013 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.28142 
PMID: 23457055  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
