

1197. Cancer. 2014 Apr 1;120(7):992-1001. doi: 10.1002/cncr.28538. Epub 2013 Dec 30.

Elevated intrinsic cancer stem cell population in human papillomavirus-associated
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Zhang M(1), Kumar B, Piao L, Xie X, Schmitt A, Arradaza N, Cippola M, Old M,
Agrawal A, Ozer E, Schuller DE, Teknos TN, Pan Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, The Ohio State University 
Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio; Arthur G. James Cancer Hospital and
Richard J. Solove Research Institute, The Ohio State University Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Columbus, Ohio.

BACKGROUND: Human papillomavirus 16 (HPV16) is a major risk factor for the
development of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), particularly the
development of oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC). Cancer stem cells
(CSCs) are resistant to conventional therapies, and it is postulated that they
are responsible for disease recurrence and/or progression. Because the prognoses 
of patients with HPV16-positive and HPV-negative HNSCC are distinct, the authors 
sought to determine whether differences in the number of CSCs could account for
this clinical observation.
METHODS: CSC populations in HPV16-positive and HPV-negative HNSCC were assessed
using a proprietary assay based on expression of the enzyme aldehyde
dehydrogenase (ALDH), an in vitro tumorsphere formation assay, and an in vivo
limiting cell dilution in nonobese diabetic/severe combined immunodeficiency
mice. A high-density tissue microarray was stained with ALDH1, a CSC marker, to
determine the association between CSCs and HPV16-positive/HPV-negative OPSCC.
RESULTS: HPV16-positive HNSCC had a greater intrinsic CSC pool than HPV-negative 
HNSCC. Inactivation of p53 has been identified as a major mechanism for the
elevated CSC population in HPV16-positive HNSCC. In vivo limiting cell dilution
experiments using tumors from patients with HPV16-positive and HPV-negative OPSCC
indicated that the CSC frequency was 62.5-fold greater in an HPV16-positive OPSCC
tumor than in an HPV-negative OPSCC tumor. Primary tumors from patients with
HPV16-positive OPSCC were associated with elevated tumor ALDH1 staining, further 
extending the association between HPV16 and CSCs.
CONCLUSIONS: The current data and the clinical observation that patients with
HPV16-positive HNSCC respond more favorably to current treatment paradigms than
patients with HPV-negative HNSCC support the suggestion that CSC phenotype is not
homogeneous. Therefore, the reliance on the CSC number may be insufficient to
accurately assess the potential of a particular tumor for disease recurrence
and/or progression.

Â© 2013 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28538 
PMCID: PMC3961512
PMID: 24382806  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
