

1198. Tumour Biol. 2012 Apr;33(2):543-50. doi: 10.1007/s13277-011-0295-x. Epub 2012 Jan
10.

Relationship between p53 overexpression, human papillomavirus infection, and
lifestyle in Indian patients with head and neck cancers.

Jamaly S(1), Khanehkenari MR, Rao R, Patil G, Thakur S, Ramaswamy P, Ajaikumar
BS, Sahoo R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Genetics, Brindavan College, Bangalore, 560094, India.

Exposure to pollutants in the environment, tobacco and alcohol consumption, poor 
oral hygiene and opportunistic viral infections are important aetiological
factors in head and neck cancers. In this study, we evaluate the complex
interrelationships between these factors and molecular events such as p53
overexpression in causation of head and neck cancers. Tissue samples from 110
patients with histopathologically confirmed carcinoma of head and neck were
analyzed from our tissue biorepository with patient consent. Data pertaining to
their dietary habits, tobacco and alcohol consumption were abstracted. P53
overexpression was analysed by immunohistochemistry and HPV (high-risk genotype) 
were studied by Chromogenic in situ Hybridization using an ultra sensitive DNA
probe. Chi-square analysis was done to determine relationships between
proportions of dependent and independent variables. Bivariate relationships were 
determined between these variables using Spearman's rank correlation. Linear
regression analysis was used to determine the best predictor variable influencing
p53 expression. Tobacco consumption especially smoking cigarettes and all forms
of tobacco consumption put together and HPV infection significantly influenced
p53 overexpression. Forty-five percent of the studied cohort was positive for
HPV. Regression analysis showed interaction between tobacco and HPV infection to 
be a primary predictor (Î² = 0.31, p = 0.02) for p53 expression. Tobacco in any
form: chewing, smoking and snuffing, along with HPV infection is significantly
associated with p53 overexpression. There is a high prevalence of HPV infection
(45%) in Indian patients suggesting its possible role in the aetiology of head
and neck cancer.

DOI: 10.1007/s13277-011-0295-x 
PMID: 22231431  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
