

12. Semin Diagn Pathol. 2015 Jan;32(1):12-22. doi: 10.1053/j.semdp.2014.12.001. Epub 
2015 Feb 7.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated lymphoid lesions of the head and neck.

Auerbach A(1), Aguilera NS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematopathology, The Joint Pathology Center, 606 Stephen Sitter
Lane, Silver Spring, Maryland 20910.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia.
Electronic address: na2d@virginia.edu.

Epstein Barr virus (EBV)-related lymphoproliferative processes occur in the head 
and neck ranging from reactive processes such as infectious mononucleosis to high
grade malignant lymphomas. EBV is a ubiquitous herpes virus that infects more
than 90% of adults worldwide, and is generally transferred though saliva. Primary
infection can occur throughout life. EBV is the first virus linked to
malignancies, both epithelial and lymphoid. Both T and B cell lymphomas can be
associated with EBV and evidence shows that an individual's response to the acute
EBV infection may be critical in the development of subsequent lymphoma.
Currently, in situ hybridization for EBER is the most sensitive available test to
detect EBV and should be routinely performed in lymphoproliferative lesions of
the head and neck. Immunohistochemistry for EBV related proteins, such as LMP1,
is much less sensitive than EBER in situ hybridization, but can help determine
latency patterns of EBV infection. Although relatively rare, primary EBV-related 
lymphomas must be considered in the differential of atypical lymphoid
proliferations in the head and neck. We present selected EBV-related disorders of
the head and neck discussing etiology as well as differential diagnosis.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1053/j.semdp.2014.12.001 
PMID: 25804341  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
