

1203. N Engl J Med. 2017 Aug 10;377(6):513-522. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1701717.

Analysis of Plasma Epstein-Barr Virus DNA to Screen for Nasopharyngeal Cancer.

Chan KCA(1), Woo JKS(1), King A(1), Zee BCY(1), Lam WKJ(1), Chan SL(1), Chu
SWI(1), Mak C(1), Tse IOL(1), Leung SYM(1), Chan G(1), Hui EP(1), Ma BBY(1), Chiu
RWK(1), Leung SF(1), van Hasselt AC(1), Chan ATC(1), Lo YMD(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences (K.C.A.C., W.K.J.L.,
S.W.I.C., C.M., I.O.L.T., S.Y.M.L., G.C., R.W.K.C., Y.M.D.L.), the Department of 
Chemical Pathology (K.C.A.C., W.K.J.L., S.W.I.C., C.M., I.O.L.T., S.Y.M.L., G.C.,
R.W.K.C., Y.M.D.L.), State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Sir Y.K.
Pao Centre for Cancer (K.C.A.C., W.K.J.L., S.L.C., S.W.I.C., C.M., I.O.L.T.,
S.Y.M.L., G.C., E.P.H., B.B.Y.M., R.W.K.C., S.-F.L., A.T.C.C., Y.M.D.L.),
Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery (J.K.S.W., W.K.J.L.,
A.C.H.), Department of Imaging and Interventional Radiology (A.K.), Jockey Club
School of Public Health and Primary Care (B.C.Y.Z.), and Department of Clinical
Oncology (S.L.C., E.P.H., B.B.Y.M., S.-F.L., A.T.C.C.), Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Prince of Wales Hospital - all in Hong Kong.

Erratum in
    N Engl J Med. 2018 Mar 8;378(10 ):973.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2017 Aug 10;377(6):584-585.

BACKGROUND: Circulating cell-free Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) DNA is a biomarker for
nasopharyngeal carcinoma. We conducted a prospective study to investigate whether
EBV DNA in plasma samples would be useful to screen for early nasopharyngeal
carcinoma in asymptomatic persons.
METHODS: We analyzed EBV DNA in plasma specimens to screen participants who did
not have symptoms of nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Participants with initially
positive results were retested approximately 4 weeks later, and those with
persistently positive EBV DNA in plasma underwent nasal endoscopic examination
and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
RESULTS: A total of 20,174 participants underwent screening. EBV DNA was
detectable in plasma samples obtained from 1112 participants (5.5%), and 309
(1.5% of all participants and 27.8% of those who initially tested positive) had
persistently positive results on the repeated sample. Among these 309
participants, 300 underwent endoscopic examination, and 275 underwent both
endoscopic examination and MRI; of these participants, 34 had nasopharyngeal
carcinoma. A significantly higher proportion of participants with nasopharyngeal 
carcinoma that was identified by screening had stage I or II disease than in a
historical cohort (71% vs. 20%, P<0.001 by the chi-square test) and had superior 
3-year progression-free survival (97% vs. 70%; hazard ratio, 0.10; 95% confidence
interval, 0.05 to 0.18). Nine participants declined to undergo further testing,
and 1 of them presented with advanced nasopharyngeal carcinoma 32 months after
enrollment. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma developed in only 1 participant with
negative EBV DNA in plasma samples within 1 year after testing. The sensitivity
and specificity of EBV DNA in plasma samples in screening for nasopharyngeal
carcinoma were 97.1% and 98.6%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Analysis of EBV DNA in plasma samples was useful in screening for
early asymptomatic nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma was
detected significantly earlier and outcomes were better in participants who were 
identified by screening than in those in a historical cohort. (Funded by the
Kadoorie Charitable Foundation and the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong
government; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02063399 .).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1701717 
PMID: 28792880  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
