

1209. World J Surg Oncol. 2009 Dec 18;7:99. doi: 10.1186/1477-7819-7-99.

Atypical presentation of angiosarcoma of the scalp in the setting of human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV).

Govender PS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiotherapy and Oncology, Nelson R, Mandela School of Medicine,
University of Kwazulu Natal, Durban, South Africa. poovan.gov@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Angiosarcoma of the head and neck is an uncommon, aggressive
malignant entity most commonly found in elderly Caucasian males. We present a
case in a young black female with co-existing HIV. The atypical gender, age and
race of the patient reflect the unusual clinical presentation of this case of
angiosarcoma, attributable to the patient's HIV status.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 22 year old patient presented with a large unresectable
lesion over the occiput with surrounding ulceration, satellite lesions and
associated lymphadenopathy. She is HIV-infected with a CD4 count of 360
cells/microl. She was not on antiretroviral treatment based on South African
treatment guidelines advocating antiretroviral treatment when the CD4 count is
below 200 cells/microl, in the absence of other AIDS-defining illnesses.The
patient was treated with a course of ifosfamide and anthracyline based
chemotherapy. Disease progression was noted on chemotherapy and she was
subsequently palliated with a course of radiotherapy. She had a satisfactory
response with an improvement in local symptoms. She is currently receiving
symptomatic care.
CONCLUSIONS: South Africa is at the epicenter of the HIV epidemic. Consequently, 
the management of patients in the field of oncology in our clinical practice is
often burdened with malignancies manifesting with an atypical disease
presentation and clinical course.

DOI: 10.1186/1477-7819-7-99 
PMCID: PMC2803177
PMID: 20021674  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
