

121. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2015 Dec;32(8):835-45. doi: 10.1007/s10585-015-9744-z. Epub 
2015 Sep 10.

The prevalence of human papillomavirus in squamous cell carcinoma of unknown
primary site metastatic to neck lymph nodes: a systematic review.

Boscolo-Rizzo P(1), Schroeder L(2), Romeo S(3), Pawlita M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Regional Center for Head and Neck Cancer,
University of Padua, P.le Ospedale 1, 31100, Treviso, Italy.
paolo.boscolorizzo@unipd.it.
(2)Division of Molecular Diagnostics of Oncogenic Infections, Research Program
Infection and Cancer, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), F020, Heidelberg,
Germany.
(3)Department of Pathology, Treviso Regional Hospital, Treviso, Italy.

A subset of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, which mainly arise from the
crypt epithelium of the palatine and lingual tonsils, may be caused by high-risk 
human papillomavirus (HPV) infections. This topographical restriction together
with other overlapping clinical features have led investigators to suspect that
HPV plays a role in squamous cell carcinoma of unknown primary (SCCUP) site
metastatic to neck lymph nodes. We performed a systematic review of articles
listed in PubMed to identify studies testing HPV and/or p16(INK4a) status (p16)
in tissue samples from initial and definitive SCCUP. The prevalence of
HPV-related (HPV DNA-positive and/or p16 positive) SCCUP was calculated for all
the SCCUP, initial SCCUP, suspected definitive SCCUP, and true definitive SCCUP
whenever a minimum of 10 cases of each category was identified. In addition, data
concerning patients' diagnostic work-up, the HPV detection methods, and the
correlations between HPV-status, the localization of the occult primary tumor,
and the clinical outcome were also extracted. Eighteen retrospective cohort
studies, assessing a total of 659 patients, met the inclusion criteria. The
overall median prevalences of HPV-DNA(pos), of p16(pos), and of positivity for
both HPV markers were, respectively, 37.0, 48.5, and 36.0 %. Patients with
diagnosis of initial SCCUP had overall median prevalences of HPV-DNA(pos), of
p16(pos), and of positivity for both HPV markers, respectively, of 81.8, 86.2,
and 80.8 %. The data uncovered by this systematic review confirm that SCCUP is
frequently causally associated to HPV-driven oropharyngeal squamous cell
carcinomas. This finding supports the view that HPV-status could be routinely
assessed in SCCUP patients as it may lead to identifying the primary tumor and
the decision to de-escalate treatment.

DOI: 10.1007/s10585-015-9744-z 
PMID: 26358913  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
