

1219. Mol Carcinog. 2011 Sep;50(9):680-8. doi: 10.1002/mc.20798. Epub 2011 May 11.

Promoter methylation of cyclin A1 is associated with human papillomavirus 16
induced head and neck squamous cell carcinoma independently of p53 mutation.

Weiss D(1), Basel T, Sachse F, Braeuninger A, Rudack C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University of
Muenster, Germany.

Aberrant promoter methylation of specific genes and infection with human
papillomavirus 16 (HPV16) are known risk factors for the development of Head and 
Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma (HNSCC). Little knowledge exists on the interaction 
of HPV16 infection and promoter methylation in HNSCC. The promoter methylation
status of 12 genes (TIMP3, CDH1, CDKN2A, DAPK1, transcription factor 21 (TCF21), 
CD44, MLH1, MGMT, RASSF1, cyclin A1 (CCNA1), LARS2, and CEBPA) was evaluated by
methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction in 55 primary HNSCC and 31
controls. The results were correlated with HPV16 status and clinicopathological
characteristics. CCNA1 and p53 protein expression were additionally determined by
immunohistochemistry and compared with p53 mutation status. Methylation of DAPK1 
(P = 0.043), CCNA1 (P = 0.016) and TCF21 (P = 0.0005) was significantly more
present in HNSCC than in controls. The genes TIMP3 (P = 0.018) and CCNA1 (P =
0.015) showed higher methylation frequency in HPV16 positive HNSCC compared to
HPV16 negative tumors. CCNA1 methylation did not correlate with CCNA1 protein
expression and p53 mutation, respectively. Methylation of TCF21 was associated
with higher age (P = 0.044) and nicotine abuse (P = 0.035). Methylation of CCNA1 
was significantly more present in females (P = 0.003). Methylation of TCF21 and
CCNA1 are important risk factors for HNSCC development. CCNA1 methylation may
play a crucial role in HPV16-induced carcinogenesis of HNSCC independently of
p53.

Copyright Â© 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mc.20798 
PMID: 21563216  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
