

1223. Cancer Sci. 2015 Oct;106(10):1333-40. doi: 10.1111/cas.12761. Epub 2015 Sep 25.

Human papillomavirus type 16 E7 oncoprotein mediates CCNA1 promoter methylation.

Chalertpet K(1), Pakdeechaidan W(1), Patel V(2), Mutirangura A(3),
Yanatatsaneejit P(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Research Group, Department of Botany, Faculty of Science,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Cancer Research Initiatives Foundation, Sime Darby Medical Centre, Subang
Jaya, Malaysia.
(3)Center of Excellence in Molecular Genetics of Cancer and Human Diseases,
Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok,
Thailand.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) oncoproteins drive distinctive promoter methylation
patterns in cancer. However, the underlying mechanism remains to be elucidated.
Cyclin A1 (CCNA1) promoter methylation is strongly associated with HPV-associated
cancer. CCNA1 methylation is found in HPV-associated cervical cancers, as well as
in head and neck squamous cell cancer. Numerous pieces of evidence suggest that
E7 may drive CCNA1 methylation. First, the CCNA1 promoter is methylated in
HPV-positive epithelial lesions after transformation. Second, the CCNA1 promoter 
is methylated at a high level when HPV is integrated into the human genome.
Finally, E7 has been shown to interact with DNA methyltransferase 1 (Dnmt1).
Here, we sought to determine the mechanism by which E7 increases methylation in
cervical cancer by using CCNA1 as a gene model. We investigated whether E7
induces CCNA1 promoter methylation, resulting in the loss of expression. Using
both E7 knockdown and overexpression approaches in SiHa and C33a cells, our data 
showed that CCNA1 promoter methylation decreases with a corresponding increase in
expression in E7 siRNA-transfected cells. By contrast, CCNA1 promoter methylation
was augmented with a corresponding reduction in expression in E7-overexpressing
cells. To confirm whether the binding of the E7-Dnmt1 complex to the CCNA1
promoter induced methylation and loss of expression, ChIP assays were carried out
in E7-, del CR3-E7 and vector control-overexpressing C33a cells. The data showed 
that E7 induced CCNA1 methylation by forming a complex with Dnmt1 at the CCNA1
promoter, resulting in the subsequent reduction of expression in cancers. It is
interesting to further explore the genome-wide mechanism of E7
oncoprotein-mediated DNA methylation.

Â© 2015 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.12761 
PMCID: PMC4638020
PMID: 26250467  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
