

1225. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2011 Nov;268(11):1625-31. doi:
10.1007/s00405-011-1515-0. Epub 2011 Feb 15.

Prevalence and clinical features of human papillomavirus in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma in Okinawa, southern Japan.

Deng Z(1), Hasegawa M, Matayoshi S, Kiyuna A, Yamashita Y, Maeda H, Suzuki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Graduate school of
Medicine, University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara-cho, Okinawa, 903-0215, Japan.
jordandzy@hotmail.com

Previous studies from Okinawa, a subtropical island in southern Japan,
demonstrated a higher prevalence of human papillomavirus (HPV) in oral carcinoma 
and a higher incidence of oral and pharyngeal carcinoma than those for mainland
Japan. The present study aims to investigate epidemiologic and clinical features 
of HPV in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) in Okinawa. A total of
150 DNA samples from 150 Okinawan patients with head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) were screened for HPV sequences by PCR using three consensus
primer sets, and HPV types were determined by direct sequencing. The samples were
consisted of 46 cases from the hypopharynx, 44 from the oropharynx, 16 from the
larynx, 25 from the oral cavity, 10 from the maxillary sinus, and 9 from the
nasopharynx. HPV DNA was detected in 45 (30.0%) HNSCCs, and HPV-16 was identified
in 86.7% of positive specimens. The highest prevalence of the HPV sequence was
found in oropharyngeal carcinomas (50.0%), especially in tonsillar cancer
(63.6%). Multivariate analysis showed that oropharyngeal carcinoma (P = 0.002; OR
= 5.34; 95% CI = 1.83-15.58), oral cavity carcinoma (P = 0.012; OR = 4.94; 95% CI
= 1.43-17.10), and histological poor differentiation (P = 0.011; OR = 4.25; 95%
CI = 1.39-13.04) each independently increased the prevalence of HPV infection.
The present study reveals that patients with HNSCC, e.g., oropharyngeal and oral 
cavity carcinomas, in Okinawa have relatively high HPV-16 positive rates and low 
HPV-18 positive rates comparing with mainland Japan.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-011-1515-0 
PMID: 21328000  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
