

1228. Int J Cancer. 2012 Sep 1;131(5):1124-30. doi: 10.1002/ijc.26490. Epub 2011 Nov
28.

Survival in patients with human papillomavirus positive tonsillar cancer in
relation to treatment.

Attner P(1), Näsman A, Du J, Hammarstedt L, Ramqvist T, Lindholm J, Munck-Wikland
E, Dalianis T, Marklund L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Karolinska
University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. per.attner@karolinska.se

Erratum in
    Int J Cancer. 2012 Nov 1;131(9):E1183.

The incidence of tonsillar cancer and the proportion of human papillomavirus
(HPV) positive tonsillar cancer cases have increased in the last decades. In
parallel, treatment for tonsillar cancer has been intensified e.g., by
accelerated radiotherapy, and chemotherapy, resulting in more side effects.
Patients with HPV-positive tonsillar cancer have better prognosis than those with
HPV-negative tumors, and the former group could hypothetically benefit from
reduced, less-toxic treatment without compromising survival. Here, we therefore
evaluated possible differences in overall and disease-specific survival after
different oncological treatments in 153 patients with HPV DNA- and P16-positive
tonsillar cancer who were diagnosed and treated with intent to cure between 2000 
and 2007, in Stockholm, Sweden. Of these patients, 86 were treated with
conventional radiotherapy, 40 were treated with accelerated radiotherapy and 27
were treated with chemoradiotherapy. There were no significant differences in
overall or disease-free survival between the groups. However, there was a trend, 
implying a beneficial effect of the intensified treatment, with chemoradiotherapy
being better than radiotherapy despite that more patients had stage IV disease in
the former group; and accelerated radiotherapy being better than conventional
radiotherapy. This needs to be followed further in larger more homogenous groups 
of patients. In conclusion, patients with HPV-positive tonsillar cancer treated
with conventional- or accelerated radiotherapy or chemoradiotherapy disclosed
similar survival rates. The trend for better survival and less metastasis after
intensified treatment underlines the need for large prospective studies comparing
less intense to more intense treatment (chemoradiotherapy).

Copyright © 2011 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.26490 
PMID: 22038860  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
