

1238. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Jan;1838(1 Pt B):134-47. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamem.2013.09.001. Epub 2013 Sep 12.

Improving the stability and function of purified ABCB1 and ABCA4: the influence
of membrane lipids.

Pollock NL(1), McDevitt CA, Collins R, Niesten PH, Prince S, Kerr ID, Ford RC,
Callaghan R.

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, John Radcliffe Hospital, 
University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK.

ATP Binding Cassette (ABC) transporters play prominent roles in numerous cellular
processes and many have been implicated in human diseases. Unfortunately,
detailed mechanistic information on the majority of ABC transporters has not yet 
been elucidated. The slow rate of progress of molecular and high resolution
structural studies may be attributed to the difficulty in the investigation of
integral membrane proteins. These difficulties include the expression of
functional, non-aggregated protein in heterologous systems. Furthermore, the
extraction of membrane proteins from source material remains a major bottle-neck 
in the process since there are relatively few guidelines for selection of an
appropriate detergent to achieve optimal extraction. Whilst affinity tag
strategies have simplified the purification of membrane proteins; many challenges
remain. For example, the chromatographic process and associated steps can rapidly
lead to functional inactivation, random aggregation, or even precipitation of the
target protein. Furthermore, optimisation of high yield and purity, does not
guarantee successful structure determination. Based on this series of potential
issues, any investigation into structure-function of membrane proteins requires a
systematic evaluation of preparation quality. In particular, the evaluation
should focus on function, homogeneity and mono-dispersity. The present
investigation provides a detailed assessment of the quality of purified ATP
Binding Cassette (ABC) transporters; namely ABCB1 (P-gp) and ABCA4 (ABCR). A
number of suggestions are provided to facilitate the production of functional,
homogeneous and mono-disperse preparations using the insect cell expression
system. Finally, the ABCA4 samples have been used to provide structural insights 
into this essential photo-receptor cell protein.

Â© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2013.09.001 
PMID: 24036079  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
