

1243. Eur J Pediatr. 2009 Nov;168(11):1365-72. doi: 10.1007/s00431-009-0939-7. Epub
2009 Feb 17.

Clinical and microbiological impact of human bocavirus on children with acute
otitis media.

Beder LB(1), Hotomi M, Ogami M, Yamauchi K, Shimada J, Billal DS, Ishiguro N,
Yamanaka N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Wakayama Medical
University, Kimiidera 811-1, Wakayama-shi 641-0012, Wakayama, Japan.

Human Bocavirus (HBoV) as a newly discovered parvovirus has been commonly
detected in respiratory tract infections. However, its role in acute otitis media
(AOM) has not been well studied. We examined HBoV in Japanese children with AOM
and evaluated the virus prevalence together with clinical manifestations and
bacterial findings. Overall, 222 nasopharyngeal swabs and 176 middle ear fluids
(MEF) samples were collected from 222 children with AOM (median age, 19 months)
between May 2006 and April 2007. HBoV detection was performed by PCR and
bacterial isolation by standard culture methods. HBoV was found in the
nasopharyngeal aspirates of 14 children (6.3%) and in the MEF of six children
(2.7%). When HBoV detection results were evaluated with clinical characteristics 
of children, resolution time of AOM was significantly longer (p=0.04), and rate
of fever symptom was also higher in HBoV-positive group (p=0.04). Furthermore, we
found positive correlation between detection of HBoV and Streptococcus pneumoniae
in the MEF (p=0.004). Nevertheless, nasopharyngeal proportion of S. pneumoniae
was similar between virus positive and negative groups. Furthermore, S.
pneumoniae was detected as a single pathogen in all MEF of HBoV-positive cases
but one, while it presents mixed with other pathogenic bacteria in nasopharynx.
In conclusion, HBoV may worsen the clinical symptoms and prolong the clinical
outcome of AOM in pediatric population. Finally, HBoV may prime the secondary
bacterial infection in the middle ear in favor of S. pneumoniae.

DOI: 10.1007/s00431-009-0939-7 
PMID: 19221788  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
