

1250. Int J Cancer. 2011 Oct 1;129(7):1752-60. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25825. Epub 2011 Feb
26.

The prognostic significance of tumor human papillomavirus status for patients
with anal squamous cell carcinoma treated with combined chemoradiotherapy.

Yhim HY(1), Lee NR, Song EK, Kwak JY, Lee ST, Kim JH, Kim JS, Park HS, Chung IJ, 
Shim HJ, Hwang JE, Kim HR, Nam TK, Park MR, Shim H, Park HS, Kim HS, Yim CY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Chonbuk National University Medical School,
Jeonju, Korea.

The prognostic relevance of tumor human papillomavirus (HPV) status in anal
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) had not been previously investigated, although its 
relevance to cervical, head and neck SCC is known. We retrospectively evaluated
outcomes in 47 patients with anal SCC treated with combined chemoradiotherapy
(CCRT) and determined tumor HPV status by HPV DNA chip method and p16 expression 
by immunohistochemistry (IHC) from paraffin-embedded tumor tissues. The median
age was 65 years (range, 44-90 years). Sixteen (34%) patients were diagnosed with
T stage 3 to 4, and 18 (38%) patients had regional nodal disease (N-positive).
Thirty-five (75%) patients were HPV positive, and 31 (66%) patients were genotype
16 (HPV16-positive). Thirty-nine (83.0%) patients were positive for p16. After
median follow-up of 51.7 months (range, 5.1-136.0 months), HPV16-positive group
had significantly better 4-year progression-free survival (PFS, 63.1% vs. 15.6%, 
p < 0.001) and overall survival (84.6% vs. 39.8%, p = 0.008) than HPV genotype 16
negative (HPV16-negative) group. Patients with p16-positive tumor also had a
better 4-year PFS (52.5% vs. 25.0%, p = 0.014) than those with p16-negative
tumor. In multivariate analysis for PFS, N-positive and HPV16-negative were
independent prognostic factors for shorter PFS. Comparing patterns of failure,
time to loco-regional failure was statistically superior in HPV16-positive over
HPV16-negative groups (p = 0.006), but time to systemic failure was not different
(p = 0.098). Tumor HPV genotype 16 status is a prognostic and predictive factor
in anal SCC treated with CCRT, and p16 expression determined by IHC might be
advocated as a surrogate biomarker of HPV integration in anal SCC. Further
studies are warranted.

Copyright Â© 2010 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.25825 
PMID: 21128253  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
