

1252. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2016 Aug;273(8):2157-69. doi:
10.1007/s00405-015-3728-0. Epub 2015 Jul 31.

Meta-analysis of survival in patients with HNSCC discriminates risk depending on 
combined HPV and p16 status.

Coordes A(1), Lenz K(2), Qian X(1), Lenarz M(1), Kaufmann AM(3), Albers AE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Institute of Medical Biometrics and Clinical Epidemiology,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Clinic for Gynecology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus Benjamin
Franklin, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Berlin, Germany.
andreas.albers@charite.de.

Data indicate a better prognosis for human papillomavirus (HPV)-associated head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). HPV and p16 detection are established
markers for HPV-related HNSCC. Both are accepted as survival-independent
predictors. Previous studies investigating the survival in HNSCC patients
depending on HPV(+/-) and p16(+/-) status consistently found discordant results
with p16(-)/HPV(+) and p16(+)/HPV(-). However, no meta-analysis regarding the
survival according to combined HPV/p16 status has been performed yet. The
objective of this study was to discriminate the impact of combined HPV(+/-) and
p16(+/-) status on survival. Data sources were identification and review of
publications assessing survival of the distinct subgroups with both p16 and HPV
investigated in HNSCC until February, 2015. A meta-analysis was performed to
classify survival and clinical outcomes. 18 out of 397 articles (4424 patients)
were eligible for the meta-analysis. The percent proportion of the subgroups was 
25 % for HPV(+)/p16(+), 61.2 % for HPV(-)/p16(-), 7.1 % for HPV(-)/p16(+) and
6.8 % for HPV(+)/P16(-). The meta-analysis showed a significantly improved 5-year
overall survival (OS), 5-year disease-free survival and their corresponding
hazard ratio for HPV(+)/p16(+) HNSCC in comparison to HPV(-)/p16(-),
HPV(+)/p16(-) and HPV(-)/p16(+). The 5-year OS of the HPV(-)/p16(+) subgroup was 
intermediate while HPV(+)/p16(-) and HPV(-)/p16(-) HNSCC had the shortest
survival. With current therapeutic strategies, survival of patients with HNSCC is
better if associated with HPV(+)/p16(+) or HPV(-)/p16(+). Clinical trials are
needed to confirm the distinct survival pattern and to investigate possible
differences in survival for HPV(+)/p16(-) and HPV(-)/p16(+) HNSCC. To further
differentiate p16(+) HNSCC, HPV testing may be advisable.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-015-3728-0 
PMID: 26227616  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
