

1257. Oncol Rep. 2011 Mar;25(3):669-76. doi: 10.3892/or.2011.1136. Epub 2011 Jan 10.

Molecular characterization of late stomal recurrence following total
laryngectomy.

Stephen JK(1), Symal M, Chen KM, Ghanem T, Deeb R, Shah V, Havard S, Worsham MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, Henry Ford Hospital,
Detroit, MI 48202, USA.

The goal was to determine recurrent or second primary status for late stomal
malignancies, 16 and 17 years post-total laryngectomy in two laryngeal squamous
cell carcinoma (LSCC) patients, based on DNA methylation signatures and HPV
typing. Adopting a literature review based definition of late stomal recurrences 
as new primaries at the site of the stoma or neopharynx occurring >5 years after 
total laryngectomy, we employed a multi-gene candidate approach to examine
promoter methylation in 24 tumor suppressor genes and PCR-based assays for HPV
status offered additional insights into whether the late stomal tumors post-total
laryngectomy were related or not. The primary tumor for Patient 1 was negative
for HPV but had aberrant hypermethylation of APC, MLH1 and BRCA1. The stomal
biopsy 17-years later showed presence of HPV-16 without any methylated genes. In 
Patient 2, HPV-11 and promoter methylation of APC identified in the primary tumor
was also observed in the stomal malignancy 16 years post-total laryngectomy.
Additional information provided by molecular typing for HPV and methylation
markers underscored Patient 1's and 2's late stomal presentation as most likely a
second primary and recurrence, respectively. DNA methylation markers are
particularly advantageous because DNA methylation is an early event in
tumorigenesis, and the epigenetic modification, 5-methylcytosine, is a stable
marker. Molecular marks to discern genetic heterogeneity or relatedness of stomal
malignancies several years post-total laryngectomy can provide clues to their
status as either second primaries or likely recurrences. Our results support the 
hypothesis that a subset of stomal recurrences after total laryngectomy
represents second primary tumors.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2011.1136 
PMCID: PMC3718469
PMID: 21225233  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
