

1259. Oncology. 2018;95(4):193-201. doi: 10.1159/000489786. Epub 2018 Jun 19.

An Update on Cellular MicroRNA Expression in Human Papillomavirus-Associated Head
and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma.

Emmett S(1)(2)(3), Whiteman DC(1)(2), Panizza BJ(2)(3), Antonsson A(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Population Health, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute,
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(2)School of Medicine, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology, Princess Alexandra Hospital, Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia.

Squamous cell carcinoma of mucosal sites in the head and neck (HNSCC) is the
sixth most common cause of cancer worldwide, and despite advances in conventional
management, it still has significant morbidity and mortality associated with both
diagnosis and treatment. Advances in our understanding of the biological
mechanisms underlying this disease have demonstrated a significant difference
between human papillomavirus (HPV)-associated, HPV and tobacco associated, and
HPV-negative disease. It remains important to further elucidate the biologic and 
genetic differences between HPV-associated and tobacco-associated disease, with
the aim of earlier diagnosis through screening, and advances in management
including the development of novel therapeutic agents. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are
small, non-coding RNAs that function as post-transcriptional regulators of gene
expression, and have effects on almost every cellular function, and have
potentially important applications to diagnosis, management and prognosis in
HNSCC. Establishing a cellular miRNA expression profile for HPV-associated
disease may therefore have important implications for the screening and treatment
of this disease. This review summarises the current findings regarding miRNA
expression in mucosal HNSCC, and focuses particularly on miRNA expression in
HPV-associated tumours.

Â© 2018 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000489786 
PMID: 29920485  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
