
Conflict of interest statement: Prof. van den Heuvel is a consultant for MSD on
the area of microbiological method validation. Funding No specific funding.
Research involving human participants and/or animals: human patients involved in 
this retrospective cohort study, no animals. Institutional Review Board approval 
for retrospective cohort research is not needed in The Netherlands. All
procedures performed in studies involving human participants were in accordance
with the ethical standards of the institutional and/or national research
committee and with the 1964 Helsinki Declaration and its later amendments or
comparable ethical standards. Informed consent Written approval of all patients
was received.


1261. Oral Oncol. 2013 Dec;49(12):1089-96. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2013.09.009.
Epub 2013 Oct 11.

Promising systemic immunotherapies in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Gildener-Leapman N(1), Ferris RL, Bauman JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Pittsburgh Eye and Ear Institute, 
203 Lothrop Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, United States.

Patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) demonstrate poor
survival and significant treatment morbidity with standard therapy. The immune
profile in HNSCC, whether caused by carcinogen exposure or human papillomavirus
(HPV), is notably immunosuppressive. Early clinical trials of immunotherapy in
HNSCC were troubled by systemic toxicity or difficulties in local administration.
Now, interest in immunotherapy has been revitalized by mechanistic insights into 
immune evasion by HNSCC, coupled to ongoing development of novel immunotherapies.
This review will summarize immune escape mechanisms in HNSCC, namely
downregulation of tumor antigen (TA) presentation, aberrant regulation of the
signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) family, the
immunosuppressive cytokine milieu, and dysregulation of immune effector cells.
Therapeutic strategies hypothesized to specifically counter HNSCC
immunosuppression will then be discussed. We will survey TA- targeted monoclonal 
antibodies (mAb), including the prototype cetuximab, as well as adjunctive
strategies to enhance antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity. We will
review immunomodulation to restore STAT1/STAT3 activation balance. Examples of
mAb therapy to block immunosuppressive cytokines, such as interleukin-6 or VEGF, 
will be provided. mAbs which release co-inhibitory T cell receptors such as
CTLA-4 and PD-1, overexpressed in HNSCC, also hold therapeutic promise. Finally, 
we will describe principles for therapeutic vaccination in HPV-associated HNSCC, 
where non-host TAs such as viral oncoproteins represent ideal targets, and
HPV-negative HNSCC, where p53 is a promising target. Insights into
immunosuppression in HNSCC have elucidated mechanistic targets for immunotherapy.
Rational clinical investigation may lead to effective stand alone or
combinatorial treatment approaches.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2013.09.009 
PMCID: PMC4861147
PMID: 24126223  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
