

1266. Cancer Cytopathol. 2014 Mar;122(3):167-74. doi: 10.1002/cncy.21372. Epub 2013 Nov
20.

Performance of the Roche cobas 4800 high-risk human papillomavirus test in
cytologic preparations of squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck.

Kerr DA(1), Pitman MB, Sweeney B, Arpin RN 3rd, Wilbur DC, Faquin WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts; Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.

BACKGROUND: Determining high-risk human papillomavirus (HR-HPV) status of head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) defines a tumor subset with important
clinical implications. Cytologic sampling often provides the sentinel or sole
diagnostic specimen. The authors assessed the performance characteristics for the
Roche cobas 4800 HPV real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based system
(cobas) on cytologic specimens of HNSCC compared with standard methods of in situ
hybridization (ISH) for HR-HPV and immunohistochemistry (IHC) for p16 on
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue.
METHODS: Samples of HNSCC were collected by fine-needle aspiration and from
surgical biopsies or resections, fixed, and processed with the cobas system.
Available corresponding FFPE samples were synchronously evaluated for HR-HPV
using ISH and IHC. Discrepant cases underwent additional PCR studies for
adjudication.
RESULTS: Thirty-six samples from 33 patients were analyzed. Forty-two percent (n 
= 15) of tumors were positive for HR-HPV according to cobas. Corresponding
histology with ISH (n = 30) was concordant in 91% of samples. Compared with the
adjudication PCR standard, there were 3 false-positive cases according to cobas. 
Ninety-two percent (n = 12) of cases were the HPV16 subtype. The overall
sensitivity for the cobas system was 100%, and the specificity was 86%.
CONCLUSIONS: Concordance in HNSCC HR-HPV status between cobas and ISH/IHC was >
90%, and cobas demonstrated a sensitivity of 100% and a specificity of 86%,
broadening options for HR-HPV testing of fine-needle aspiration samples.
Advantages for this system include subtyping of HR-HPV and the ability to discern
HR-HPV status earlier in a patient's treatment course.

Â© 2013 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncy.21372 
PMID: 24259368  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
