

1267. APMIS. 2017 Nov;125(11):974-984. doi: 10.1111/apm.12744. Epub 2017 Oct 4.

Architectural patterns of p16 immunohistochemical expression associated with
cancer immunity and prognosis of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Ryu HJ(1), Kim EK(1), Heo SJ(2), Cho BC(2), Kim HR(2), Yoon SO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Yonsei Cancer Center, Division of Medical Oncology, Yonsei University College 
of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

We evaluated the expression patterns of p16, which is used as a surrogate marker 
of HPV infection in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), in regard to
their biological and prognostic implications. p16 expression patterns and
infiltrated immune cells were analyzed through immunohistochemistry of p16, CD3, 
CD8, PD-1, FOXP3, and CD163 on surgically resected HNSCCs (n = 393). Patterns of 
p16 immunoexpression were defined as STRONG (strong, diffuse expression in
cytoplasm, and nucleus in >70% of tumor cells), MARGINAL (expression restricted
to tumor margins), MOSAIC (ragged, discontinued expression), NUCLEAR (expression 
in nuclei only), and ABSENT (no expression). The STRONG pattern was more frequent
in the oropharynx, and the MARGINAL pattern was noted only in the oral cavity.
MOSAIC and NUCLEAR patterns were noted at variable sites. No two patterns of p16 
expression showed the same immune cell composition of CD3+ T cells, CD8+
cytotoxic T cells, PD-1+ T cells, FOXP3+ regulatory T cells, and CD163+
macrophages. In overall and disease-free survival analyses, the STRONG pattern
showed the most favorable prognosis, while the NUCLEAR pattern had the worst
prognosis. HNSCC anatomical sites, tumor-related immune cell components, and
patient outcomes were associated with p16 expression patterns. Each architectural
pattern of p16 expression may be related to different biological and prognostic
phenotypes.

Â© 2017 APMIS. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/apm.12744 
PMID: 28975663  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
