

1273. PLoS One. 2017 Sep 14;12(9):e0184623. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0184623.
eCollection 2017.

Prevalence and determinants of oral infection by Human Papillomavirus in
HIV-infected and uninfected men who have sex with men.

Rollo F(1), Latini A(2), Pichi B(3), Colafigli M(2), Benevolo M(1), Sinopoli
I(3), Sperduti I(4), Laquintana V(1), Fabbri G(1), Frasca M(2), Cristaudo A(2),
Giuliani M(2), DonÃ  MG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Department, Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, IFO, IRCCS,
Rome, Italy.
(2)STI/HIV Unit, San Gallicano Dermatologic Institute, IFO, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(3)Otolaryngology Head Neck Surgery Department, Regina Elena National Cancer
Institute, IFO, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(4)Biostatistics Unit, Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, IFO, IRCCS, Rome, 
Italy.

BACKGROUND: Oral Human Papillomavirus (HPV) infection is rare in the general
population but common in high-risk individuals. Recent data indicate that oral
HPV is associated with the development of head and neck carcinomas. HPV16
infection, in particular, increases the risk of oropharyngeal cancer.
METHODS: We evaluated oral HPV prevalence and determinants of infection in
cancer-free HIV-infected and uninfected men who have sex with men (MSM) recruited
among attendees of an STI/HIV centre. Oral rinse and gargles were collected using
a mouthwash and analyzed with the Linear Array HPV Genotyping Test.
Socio-demographic and behavioral data were collected through face-to-face
interviews.
RESULTS: Overall, 170 MSM participated: 98 HIV-uninfected and 72 HIV-infected
(91.7% under cART). Oral HPV was detected in 17.3% and 27.8% of the subjects,
respectively (p = 0.13). Non-carcinogenic HPVs were significantly more common
among HIV-infected MSM (18.1% vs. 5.1%, p = 0.01). Prevalence of the HPV types
included in the quadrivalent HPV vaccine was similar (6.1% vs. 8.3% for the
HIV-negative and positive MSM, respectively, p = 0.76). HPV16 was the most
frequent type in HIV-negative (5.1%), and HIV-positive individuals, in the latter
group together with HPV18, 72 and 84 (4.2% each). Older age at first sex (AOR:
4.02, 95% CI: 1.17-13.86 for those older than 18 years of age at first
intercourse, p = 0.027) and a higher lifetime number of receptive oral sex
partners (AOR: 9.14, 95% CI: 2.49-33.62 for those with >50 compared to â‰¤50
partners, p<0.001) were determinants of oral HPV among HIV-infected MSM.
CONCLUSION: Oral HPV infection among MSM attending an urban STI center is very
frequent compared to the general population. Sexual behavior appears to be the
major determinant of infection among the HIV-infected individuals.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0184623 
PMCID: PMC5599005
PMID: 28910359  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
