

1277. Int J Cancer. 2015 May 1;136(9):2196-203. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29254. Epub 2014 Oct
13.

A high and increasing HPV prevalence in tonsillar cancers in Eastern Denmark,
2000-2010: the largest registry-based study to date.

Garnaes E(1), Kiss K, Andersen L, Therkildsen MH, Franzmann MB,
Filtenborg-Barnkob B, Hoegdall E, Krenk L, Josiassen M, Lajer CB, Specht L,
Frederiksen K, Friis-Hansen L, Nielsen FC, Kjaer SK, Norrild B, von Buchwald C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery and Audiology,
Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

The aim was to explore whether the incidence of tonsillar squamous cell
carcinomas (TSCCs) increased in Eastern Denmark, 2000-2010, and whether human
papillomavirus (HPV) could explain the increase, and to assess the association of
HPV prevalence with gender, age, and origin (i.e., the certainty of tonsillar
tumor origin). We applied HPV DNA PCR and p16 immunohistochemistry to all TSCCs
registered in the Danish Head and Neck Cancer Group (DAHANCA) and in the Danish
Pathology Data Bank (n = 632). Pathologists reviewed and subdivided the tumors
into two groups: specified and nonspecified TSCCs. Approximately 10% of
HPV-positive tumors was genotyped by amplicon next-generation sequencing. The
overall crude incidence of TSCCs increased significantly (2.7% per year) and was 
explained by an increasing incidence of HPV-positive TSCCs (4.9% per year). The
overall HPV prevalence was 58%, with HPV16 being the predominant HPV type. In
multivariate analysis, the HPV prevalence was associated with age (<55 vs. >60
years) (OR, 1.72; 95% CI 1.13-2.63) and origin (nonspecified vs. specified TSCCs)
(OR, 0.15; 95% CI 0.11-0.22). The association of HPV prevalence with origin
increased over time in specified TSCCs (OR per year, 1.10; 95% CI 1.01-1.19),
whereas no change over time was observed among nonspecified TSCCs (OR per year,
0.99; 95% CI 0.90-1.08). In conclusion, the observed increase in the number of
HPV-positive TSCCs can explain the increasing number of TSCCs in Eastern Denmark,
2000-2010. HPV prevalence was associated with younger age (<55 years) and a high 
certainty of tonsillar tumor origin.

© 2014 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.29254 
PMID: 25283302  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
