

1278. ORL J Otorhinolaryngol Relat Spec. 2014;76(3):137-46. doi: 10.1159/000363190.
Epub 2014 Jul 2.

Clinical features of human papilloma virus-related head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma of an unknown primary site.

Kobayashi K(1), Saito Y, Omura G, Ando M, Sakamoto T, Yamasoba T, Asakage T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, The University of Tokyo
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

PURPOSE: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma of an unknown primary site
(HNSCCUP) is a heterogeneous group of tumors that includes the human
papillomavirus (HPV)-associated oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma. To
investigate the relationship between HNSCCUP and HPV, we reviewed p16
overexpression and HPV DNA in lymph node metastases and examined their
correlation with the primary site and clinical features.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Thirty-three patients with HNSCCUP were retrospectively
studied. Dissected neck metastases were analyzed for p16 overexpression by
immunohistochemistry, and the presence of HPV DNA was investigated by in situ
hybridization.
RESULTS: Of the 33 patients, 8 (24%) exhibited p16 overexpression. p16-positive
lymph node metastases contained significantly more HPV DNA and were most
frequently associated with occult primary lesions in the oropharynx and a
favorable prognosis. Patients with a lower alcohol consumption, only level II/III
metastasis, and cystic lymph node metastasis tended to have p16 overexpression.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report on the relationship of HNSCCUP with p16 and
HPV DNA status in Asian patients. In total, 24% of the HNSCCUP patients were p16 
positive. p16 overexpression in neck metastasis was predictive of both an occult 
primary lesion in the oropharynx and an association with HPV infection. Alcohol
consumption, location, and features of neck metastasis were correlated with p16
expression.

Â© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000363190 
PMID: 24993345  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
