

1279. Cancer Med. 2014 Jun;3(3):652-9. doi: 10.1002/cam4.212. Epub 2014 Mar 10.

Epidemiology and survival of HPV-related tonsillar carcinoma.

Psychogios G(1), Alexiou C, Agaimy A, Brunner K, Koch M, Mantsopoulos K, Tomppert
A, Iro H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Friedrich Alexander 
University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Waldstrasse 1, Erlangen, 91054, Germany.

The aim of this study was to determine the proportion of human papilloma virus
(HPV)-positive cases in tonsillar carcinomas and investigate its development over
the last decade. Further aim was to show the oncologic results in accord to HPV
status and various treatment modalities. A retrospective study was conducted
between 2000 and 2012 and included 275 patients treated for tonsillar carcinoma. 
P16 immunohistochemistry was used as a surrogate marker for HPV-associated
carcinogenesis. A total of 101 (36.7%) patients proved to be p16 positive and 174
p16 negative. 80.2% of the p16-positive cases presented with T1-2 tumor. Of the
early-stage patients, 79% of the p16-positive and 52.3% of the p16-negative
presented with lymph node metastases. The percentage of p16-positive patients
increased from 23.2% in the period 2005-2007 to 58.6% in the period 2010-2012 in 
the whole population and from 30.9% to 76.9% in T1-2 carcinomas. Early T-category
p16-positive carcinomas had significantly better disease-specific survival (92.4%
vs. 75.5%, P = 0.007) and overall survival (OS, 79.6% vs. 54.3%, P < 0.001)
compared to p16-negative tumors. This study showed an increase in the percentage 
of p16-positive patients in tonsillar carcinoma from 23.2% in the years between
2005 and 2007 to 58.6% between 2010 and 2012. The majority (80.2%) of
p16-positive patients presented with early T-category tumor but most of these
(79.0%) had also lymph node metastases. Nevertheless, p16-positive patients had
excellent oncologic results after surgery and adjuvant radiotherapy and could be 
considered for de-escalation of treatment.

Â© 2014 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cam4.212 
PMCID: PMC4101756
PMID: 24616325  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
