

1283. Zhonghua Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2012 Mar;47(3):207-11.

[Human papillomavirus infection in oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma and
prognosis: a preliminary analysis of 66 cases].

[Article in Chinese]

Huang H(1), Zhang B, Chen W, Zhou SM, Zhang YX, Gao L, Xu ZG, Qiao YL, Tang PZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100021, China.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the relationship between the prognosis of patients with
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) and human papillomavirus (HPV)
infection in OSCC.
METHODS: Sixty-six patients with oropharyngeal carcinoma who met the enrollment
criteria during the period from January 1999 to December 2009 were
retrospectively reviewed. The presence or absence of HPV oncogenic types in OSCC 
specimen was determined by multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Overall
survival (OS) and disease specific survival (DSS) for HPV-positive and
HPV-negative patients were estimated by Kaplan-Meier analysis. Cox regression
model was used for multivariate analysis.
RESULTS: HPV-DNA was detected in 11(16.7%) of all specimens. Among them, 7 were
positive for HPV-16, 1 for HPV-16/11, 1 for HPV-35, 1 for HPV-58/52, and 1 for
HPV-33/52/54. With the follow-up of 3-78 months (a median of 24.5 months),
patients with HPV-positive tumors had significantly better overall survival
(χ2=5.792, P=0.016) and disease specific survival (χ2=4.721, P=0.030), the 3-year
OS and DSS were 90.0% vs 52.4% and 90.0% vs 56.4%, respectively. Multivariate
analysis by Cox regression model showed that HPV infection and nodal status were 
both independent prognostic factors for patients with OSCC (P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with HPV-positive OSCC have significantly better prognosis 
than patients with HPV-negative tumors. HPV infection is an independent
prognostic factor.


PMID: 22805021  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
