

1284. Neuropathology. 2011 Aug;31(4):440-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1789.2010.01177.x. Epub
2010 Dec 6.

A case of Epstein-Barr virus associated post-transplant lymphoproliferative
disorder with CNS involvement: pathological findings at both biopsy and autopsy.

Suzuki M(1), Kosugi I, Terada T, Shirakawa K, Suzuki H, Kono S, Miyajima H.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neurology and Pathology, Hamamatsu University School of
Medicine, Hamamatsu, Japan. ms1015@hamamed.ac.jp

Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD) with CNS involvement is an
uncommon and fatal side effect of immunosuppressants. A 55-year-old man presented
with non-fluent aphasia, fever, neck stiffness and disturbance of consciousness. 
Twenty-one years previously, the patient had undergone kidney transplantation for
chronic renal failure. Brain MRI revealed multiple lesions in the bilateral
cerebrum, right cerebellum and medulla oblongata. The brain biopsy showed
EBV-positive lymphocytes infiltrating into the subarachnoid and Virchow-Robins
space. The diagnosis of PTLD was made and the patient received a reduction in
immunosuppressants. However, the patient died of massive bleeding from a rectal
ulcer 3 months after the onset. An autopsy conducted 1 month after the biopsy
revealed a diffuse large B-cell lymphoma at the biopsy site and extracranial PTLD
lesions. Moreover, a human cytomegalovirus infection involving the rectum,
pancreas, trachea and bladder was confirmed. Comparisons with past cases
clarified the characteristics of this case, in particular, the
clinicopathological involvement of leptomeninges. In addition, there have so far 
been only a limited number of such reports demonstrating detailed pathological
findings, including both biopsy and autopsy findings. We herein describe the
relationship between clinical and pathological findings and demonstrate the way
CNS PTLD lesion progresses.

Â© 2010 Japanese Society of Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1789.2010.01177.x 
PMID: 21134001  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
