

1286. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2012 Aug;70(8):1867-79. doi: 10.1016/j.joms.2011.08.005. 
Epub 2011 Nov 10.

Streptococci-human papilloma virus interaction with ethanol exposure leads to
keratinocyte damage.

Schwartz J(1), Pavlova S, Kolokythas A, Lugakingira M, Tao L, Miloro M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Medicine and Diagnostic Sciences, and Member, University of
Illinois Cancer Center, College of Dentistry, University of Illinois at Chicago, 
Chicago, IL 60612, USA. joschwar@uic.edu

PURPOSE: Ethanol, human papilloma virus (HPV), and poor oral hygiene are risk
factors that have been attributed to oral carcinogenesis. Streptococci sp and HPV
infections are common in the head and neck, often associated with sexual
activity. Although HPV is linked to head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, it is 
unclear whether there is a similar role for Streptococci sp. This cell study
examines whether Streptococci sp and HPV-16 with exposure to ethyl alcohol (ETOH)
can act as cofactors in the malignant transformation of oral keratinocytes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: ETOH (0.1%-20% vol/vol) was used to investigate
Streptococci sp attachment with immortalized E6-expressing HPV/HOK-16B cells,
human oral buccal keratinocytes, and foreskin keratinocytes. Streptococci sp
(Streptococci mutans [LT11]) and various strains of acetaldehyde (AA) producer
and nonproducer Streptococcus salivarius (110-1, 109-2, 101-7, and 107-1) and a
lactic acid producer bacterium, Lactobacillus rhamnosus (24-1 and 25-2), were
examined for interactions with keratinocytes by use of a green dye (percent of
cells with colonies after 24 hours). Carcinogens, AA, malondialdehyde, DNA
damage, and proliferation (5'-bromo-2-deoxyuridine) among keratinocytes were also
quantified.
RESULTS: AA and malondialdehyde production from permissible Streptococci sp
significantly increased with attachment to keratinocytes, whereas L rhamnosus did
not significantly attach to keratinocytes. This attachment was associated with
enhanced levels of AA adduct formation, proliferation (5'-bromo-2-deoxyuridine
incorporation), and enhanced migration through integrin-coated basement membrane 
by HPV oral keratinocytes, which are characteristics of a malignant phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: These cell studies suggest that oral Streptococci sp and HPV
(HPV-16) cooperate to transform oral keratinocytes after low-level ETOH (1%)
exposure. These results appear to suggest a significant clinical interaction, but
further validation is warranted.

Copyright Â© 2012 American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.joms.2011.08.005 
PMID: 22079067  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
