

1290. Int J Cancer. 2009 Jun 1;124(11):2690-6. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24256.

Smoking modifies the relationship between XRCC1 haplotypes and HPV16-negative
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Applebaum KM(1), McClean MD, Nelson HH, Marsit CJ, Christensen BC, Kelsey KT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Boston University School of Public Health, Boston,
MA, USA.

Reports on the relationship between head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC)
and polymorphisms in X-ray cross complementing group 1 (XRCC1) have been
inconsistent. We hypothesized this may be due to not accounting for Human
papillomavirus type-16 (HPV16) and thus examined whether smoking modified the
association between XRCC1 haplotypes and HNSCC risk within HPV16 serologic
strata. Cases were diagnosed in Greater Boston, Massachusetts. Controls were
matched to cases on age, gender and residential town. Genotyping was conducted on
three XRCC1 polymorphisms (Arg194Trp, Arg280His and Arg399Gln) and serology was
used to determine HPV16 exposure. Unconditional logistic regression was used to
estimate odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs), adjusting for age,
sex, race, education, smoking, alcohol consumption and HPV16 serology. There was 
no overall association between XRCC1 polymorphisms and HNSCC risk. Smoking did
not modify the association between XRCC1 polymorphisms and HNSCC risk among the
HPV16 seropositive (p(interaction) = 0.89) but it did for the HPV16 seronegative 
(p(interaction)=0.04). Among the HPV16 seronegative, heavy smokers with a
haplotype containing a variant allele had an increased HNSCC risk (haplotype with
399Gln: OR, 1.35; 95% CI, 0.97-1.86), whereas never/light smokers with variant
alleles may have a reduced risk. In sum, the association between XRCC1 and HNSCC 
risk differed by HPV16 status and smoking. Among the HPV16 seronegative, heavy
smokers with XRCC1 variant alleles had an increased HNSCC risk. There was no
relationship between XRCC1 and HPV16-related HNSCC, regardless of smoking. Our
findings underscore the importance of accounting for HPV16 exposure even when
studying susceptibility to HNSCC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.24256 
PMCID: PMC2746567
PMID: 19230024  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
