

1299. Oral Oncol. 2013 Dec;49(12):1097-102. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2013.09.001.
Epub 2013 Oct 6.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma in young patients.

van Monsjou HS(1), Wreesmann VB, van den Brekel MW, Balm AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Leiden Medical Center, PO Box 9600, 2300 RC
Leiden, The Netherlands. Electronic address: h.s.van_monsjou@lumc.nl.

Epidemiologic analyses have shown disproportional increases of head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) incidence in a younger age group (younger than 45
years old), compared to patients above 45 years old. Although this group is small
(5%), it includes a significant subset of the HNSCC patient population, and is
characterized by a distinct clinical and etiological phenotype. HNSCC in young
patients often presents without significant exposure to alcohol and tobacco and
primarily affects the oropharynx and oral cavity. Exposure to human papilloma
virus (HPV) has been identified as a major contributor to the pathogenesis of
oropharyngeal carcinomas, and explains part of the observed incidence variation. 
Specific hereditary influences, including genetic predispositions accounting for 
an increased mutagen sensibility and inherited syndromes like Fanconi Anemia and 
Bloom's syndrome, have been identified as causative factors in a subgroup of
young-onset HNSCC, but their cumulative influence remains at present likely
underestimated. Circumstantial evidence suggests that young-onset HNSCC patients 
have a clinically different phenotype compared to older patients, however, the
true impact of young age on HNSCC clinical behavior will remain difficult to
determine unless multi-institutional databases will be combined. The rising
incidence of young-onset HNSCC mandates intensification of research endeavors
into its etiology, clinical phenotype and optimal management.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2013.09.001 
PMID: 24103389  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
