

130. Biomedica. 2015 Oct 23;36(0):14-24. doi: 10.7705/biomedica.v36i0.2912.

Genotyping, levels of expression and physical status of human papilloma virus in 
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma among Colombian patients.

Erira A(1), Motta LA, Chala A, Moreno A, Gamboa F, García DA.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Odontológicas, Pontificia Universidad Javeriana,
Bogotá, D.C., Colombia. halverash@gmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: One of the risk factors for squamous cell oropharyngeal carcinoma
is infection with the human papilloma virus (HPV), with prevalences that vary
depending on the geographical region. 
OBJECTIVE: To identify the most frequent HPV viral types in oropharyngeal cancer,
the levels of expression and the physical condition of the viral genome. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Forty-six patients were included in the study from among
those attending head and neck surgical services in the cities of Bogotá,
Manizales and Bucaramanga. In the histopathological report all study samples were
characterized as oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma. DNA extraction was
subsequently performed for HPV genotyping and to determine the physical state of 
the viral genome, as well as RNA to determine viral transcripts using real-time
PCR. 
RESULTS: HPV prevalence in tumors was 21.74% (n=10) and the most common viral
type was HPV-16 (nine cases). Viral expression for HPV-16 was low (one of 11
copies) and the predominant physical state of the virus was mixed (eight cases), 
with disruption observed at the E1 - E2 binding site (2525 - 3720 nucleotides). 
CONCLUSION: The prevalence of HPV associated with oropharyngeal carcinoma among
the Colombian study population was 21.7%, which is relatively low. The most
frequent viral type was HPV-16, found in a mixed form and with low expression of 
E7, possibly indicating a poor prognosis for these patients.

DOI: 10.7705/biomedica.v36i0.2912 
PMID: 27622789  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
