

1300. J Clin Microbiol. 2010 Jul;48(7):2490-4. doi: 10.1128/JCM.02369-09. Epub 2010 May
12.

Clinical and etiological characteristics of enterovirus 71-related diseases
during a recent 2-year period in Korea.

Ryu WS(1), Kang B, Hong J, Hwang S, Kim J, Cheon DS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Enteric and Hepatitis Viruses, National Institute of Health, Korea
Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Human enterovirus 71 (EV 71) has caused large-scale outbreaks of
hand-foot-and-mouth disease (HFMD), particularly in the Asian-Pacific region. In 
this study, we report a major outbreak of EV 71 infection in Korea and describe
the clinical differences between EV 71 and non-EV 71 enterovirus infections. We
prospectively enrolled patients with suspected viral infections during a recent
2-year period through a nationwide surveillance system. We identified 719
patients with suspected HFMD or herpangina using real-time PCR and genotyping
based on VP1 sequence analysis. The major pathogen causing HFMD changed
substantially from 2008 to 2009, with EV 71 becoming the most common cause of
HFMD in Korea in 2009. We successfully identified the enteroviral genotypes for
218 of the 719 patients. Patients with EV 71 infections tended to be younger than
those with non-EV 71 enteroviral infections and presented with HFMD and
meningoencephalitis. In addition, the occurrence of fever, headache, and neck
stiffness was significantly higher in patients with EV 71 infections.
Multivariable analysis showed that for patients presenting with HFMD, fever, or a
sore throat, each covariate was independently associated with EV 71 infection;
the adjusted odds ratios (with 95% confidence intervals in parentheses) for these
variables were 31.86 (10.04 to 101.09), 4.76 (1.71 to 13.25), and 0.18 (0.04 to
0.77), respectively. Our results indicate that EV 71 was a major cause of HFMD in
Korea during the study period. In addition, we found that clinical symptoms may
be helpful in the early identification of patients with EV 71 infections.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.02369-09 
PMCID: PMC2897491
PMID: 20463159  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
