
Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest to disclose.


1311. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2011;12(4):889-96.

Role of human papilloma virus in oral tongue squamous cell carcinoma.

Elango KJ(1), Suresh A, Erode EM, Subhadradevi L, Ravindran HK, Iyer SK, Iyer SK,
Kuriakose MA.

Author information: 
(1)Mazumdar-Shaw Cancer Center, Narayana Hrudayalaya Medical City, Bangalore,
India.

BACKGROUND: Human papilloma virus (HPV) is an important risk factor for head and 
neck cancer, specifically oropharyngeal cancer, but its association with oral
tongue squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is uncertain. The objectives were to
determine the HPV16 prevalence in oral tongue SCCs, its integration status and to
correlate the expression of oncogenic proteins with targets.
METHODS: In this case-control study with oral tongue SCC cases (n=60) and normal 
oral mucosa (n=46), HPV positivity was determined by polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) using consensus and HPV 16 type specific primers and p16
immunohistochemistry (IHC). The viral integration status was determined with
primers specific to the E2 gene and in situ hybridization (ISH).
Immunohistochemical analysis of HPV oncogenic proteins (E6, E7) and their target 
proteins (p53, pRb, cyclinD1, p16, Notch-1, EGFR) proteins was carried out in HPV
positive cases. The data was analyzed with SPSS software (v 11.0). Survival
analysis was carried out by the Kaplan-Meier method.
RESULTS: HPV16 was detected in 48% (n=29) of the cases and none of the controls
by PCR assay (p<0.001) while p16 IHC, as a surrogate HPV marker, detected 33%
(n=18) of the cases; 18% (n=10) were detected by both the methods. Integration
was observed in 83% (n=24) by E2-PCR and 67% (n=18) by ISH. The E6-p53 pathway
was active in 33% of the cases; E7-pRb in 52% and both in 11%. HPV positivity was
associated with well-differentiated cancers (p=0.041) and low recurrence rate
(p=0.014).
CONCLUSION: Our study confirms a positive correlation of HPV infection with oral 
tongue cancer.


PMID: 21790221  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
