

1318. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Feb 24;11(2):e1004677. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004677.
eCollection 2015 Feb.

Super-resolution imaging of ESCRT-proteins at HIV-1 assembly sites.

Prescher J(1), Baumgärtel V(1), Ivanchenko S(1), Torrano AA(1), Bräuchle C(1),
Müller B(2), Lamb DC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Physical Chemistry, Department of Chemistry, Nanosystem Initiative Munich
(NIM), Center for Integrated Protein Science Munich (CiPSM) and Center for
NanoScience (CeNS), Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Virology, Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg, 
Heidelberg, Germany.

The cellular endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) machinery
is involved in membrane budding processes, such as multivesicular biogenesis and 
cytokinesis. In HIV-infected cells, HIV-1 hijacks the ESCRT machinery to drive
HIV release. Early in the HIV-1 assembly process, the ESCRT-I protein Tsg101 and 
the ESCRT-related protein ALIX are recruited to the assembly site. Further
downstream, components such as the ESCRT-III proteins CHMP4 and CHMP2 form
transient membrane associated lattices, which are involved in virus-host membrane
fission. Although various geometries of ESCRT-III assemblies could be observed,
the actual membrane constriction and fission mechanism is not fully understood.
Fission might be driven from inside the HIV-1 budding neck by narrowing the
membranes from the outside by larger lattices surrounding the neck, or from
within the bud. Here, we use super-resolution fluorescence microscopy to
elucidate the size and structure of the ESCRT components Tsg101, ALIX, CHMP4B and
CHMP2A during HIV-1 budding below the diffraction limit. To avoid the deleterious
effects of using fusion proteins attached to ESCRT components, we performed
measurements on the endogenous protein or, in the case of CHMP4B, constructs
modified with the small HA tag. Due to the transient nature of the ESCRT
interactions, the fraction of HIV-1 assembly sites with colocalizing ESCRT
complexes was low (1.5%-3.4%). All colocalizing ESCRT clusters exhibited closed, 
circular structures with an average size (full-width at half-maximum) between 45 
and 60 nm or a diameter (determined using a Ripley's L-function analysis) of
roughly 60 to 100 nm. The size distributions for colocalizing clusters were
narrower than for non-colocalizing clusters, and significantly smaller than the
HIV-1 bud. Hence, our results support a membrane scission process driven by ESCRT
protein assemblies inside a confined structure, such as the bud neck, rather than
by large lattices around the neck or in the bud lumen. In the case of ALIX, a
cloud of individual molecules surrounding the central clusters was often
observed, which we attribute to ALIX molecules incorporated into the nascent
HIV-1 Gag shell. Experiments performed using YFP-tagged Tsg101 led to an over
10-fold increase in ESCRT structures colocalizing with HIV-1 budding sites
indicating an influence of the fusion protein tag on the function of the ESCRT
protein.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004677 
PMCID: PMC4339578
PMID: 25710462  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
