

1320. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2018 Oct 31;10(43):36757-36763. doi:
10.1021/acsami.8b14632. Epub 2018 Oct 19.

Microfluidic-Based Genosensor To Detect Human Papillomavirus (HPV16) for Head and
Neck Cancer.

Soares AC(1), Soares JC(1), Rodrigues VC(1), Follmann HDM(2), Arantes LMRB(3),
Carvalho AC(3), Melendez ME(3), Fregnani JHTG(3), Reis RM(3)(4)(5), Carvalho
AL(3), Oliveira ON Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)São Carlos Institute of Physics , University of São Paulo , 13566-590 São
Carlos , Brazil.
(2)Department of Chemistry , State University of Maringá , 87020-900 Maringá ,
Brazil.
(3)Molecular Oncology Research Center , Barretos Cancer Hospital , 14784-400
Barretos , Brazil.
(4)Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Health Sciences 
, University of Minho , 4710-057 Braga , Portugal.
(5)ICVS/3B's-PT Government Associate Laboratory , 4710-057 Braga , Portugal.

High-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) infection, mainly with HPV16 type, has been 
increasingly considered as an important etiologic factor in head and neck
cancers. Detection of HPV16 is therefore crucial for these types of cancer, but
clinical tests are not performed routinely in public health systems owing to the 
high cost and limitations of the existing tests. In this article, we report on a 
potentially low-cost genosensor capable of detecting low concentrations of HPV16 
in buffer samples and distinguishing, with high accuracy, head and neck cancer
cell lines according to their HPV16 status. The genosensor consisted of a
microfluidic device that had an active layer of a HPV16 capture DNA probe
(cpHPV16) deposited onto a layer-by-layer film of chitosan and chondroitin
sulfate. Impedance spectroscopy was the principle of detection utilized, leading 
to a limit of detection of 10.5 pM for complementary ssDNA HPV16 oligos
(ssHPV16). The genosensor was also able to distinguish among HPV16+ and HPV16-
cell lines, using the multidimensional projection technique interactive document 
mapping. Hybridization between the ssHPV16 oligos and cpHPV16 probe was confirmed
with polarization-modulated infrared reflection-absorption spectroscopy, where
PO2 and amide I and amide II bands from adenine and thymine were monitored. The
electrical response could be modeled as resulting from an adsorption process
represented in a Freundlich model. Because the fabrication procedures of the
microfluidic devices and genosensors and the data collection and analysis can be 
implemented at low cost, the results presented here amount to a demonstration of 
possible routine screening for HPV infections.

DOI: 10.1021/acsami.8b14632 
PMID: 30296059  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
