

1321. Diagn Cytopathol. 2014 Jan;42(1):85-93. doi: 10.1002/dc.23014. Epub 2013 Jun 8.

The expanding role of cytopathology in the diagnosis of HPV-related squamous cell
carcinoma of the head and neck.

Holmes BJ(1), Westra WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, the Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore,
Maryland.

Confirmation of human papillomavirus (HPV) as a causative agent for a subset of
biologically and clinically distinct squamous cell carcinomas of the head and
neck (HNSCC) has resulted in a growing need and expectation for HPV testing of
head and neck cancers. At the same time, opportunities to obtain tissue samples
for HPV testing are diminishing: The sensitivity of HPV-related HNSCC to
chemotherapy and ionizing radiation has limited the role of surgical resection,
and diagnostic tissue biopsies/resections may not be available in a substantial
portion of patients with small or occult primaries. Into this quandary steps the 
cytopathologist. Fine needle aspirates of metastatic HNSCCs and brushes of
oropharyngeal cancers provide a valuable substrate for HPV analysis. These
cytologic specimens are suitable for standard tissue-based methods of HPV
detection such as immunoperoxidase and in situ hybridization, but the expanding
demands for biomarker analysis of these limited samples is driving the
development of alternative assays that eliminate the requirement for high
cellularity and complex specimen processing. Various liquid phase assays already 
in widespread use for HPV analysis of cervical cancer risk may be directly
transferrable to the head and neck context. Implementation of these assays may
abrogate the current need for tissue acquisition of HNSCCs via a more aggressive 
surgical procedure.

Copyright Â© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/dc.23014 
PMID: 23749770  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
