

1333. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 2;10(6):e0129013. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129013.
eCollection 2015.

Immobilization of FLAG-Tagged Recombinant Adeno-Associated Virus 2 onto Tissue
Engineering Scaffolds for the Improvement of Transgene Delivery in Cell
Transplants.

Li H(1), Zhang FL(2), Shi WJ(3), Bai XJ(4), Jia SQ(5), Zhang CG(4), Ding W(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial-Head and Neck Oncology, Beijing
Stomatological Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.
(2)National Institutes for Food and Drug Controls, Beijing, China.
(3)Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China;
Department of Medical Genetics, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.
(5)Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(6)Department of Medical Genetics, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China;
Beijing Institute of Brain Disorders, Beijing, China.

The technology of virus-based genetic modification in tissue engineering has
provided the opportunity to produce more flexible and versatile biomaterials for 
transplantation. Localizing the transgene expression with increased efficiency is
critical for tissue engineering as well as a challenge for virus-based gene
delivery. In this study, we tagged the VP2 protein of type 2 adeno-associated
virus (AAV) with a 3Ã—FLAG plasmid at the N-terminus and packaged a FLAG-tagged
recombinant AAV2 chimeric mutant. The mutant AAVs were immobilized onto the
tissue engineering scaffolds with crosslinked anti-FLAG antibodies by
N-succinimidyl-3-(2-pyridyldithiol) propionate (SPDP). Cultured cells were seeded
to scaffolds to form 3D transplants, and then tested for viral transduction both 
in vitro and in vivo. The results showed that our FLAG-tagged AAV2 exerted
similar transduction efficiency compared with the wild type AAV2 when infected
cultured cells. Following immobilization onto the scaffolds of PLGA or gelatin
sponge with anti-FLAG antibodies, the viral mediated transgene expression was
significantly improved and more localized. Our data demonstrated that the
mutation of AAV capsid targeted for antibody-based immobilization could be a
practical approach for more efficient and precise transgene delivery. It was also
suggested that the immobilization of AAV might have attractive potentials in
applications of tissue engineering involving the targeted gene manipulation in 3D
tissue cultures.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129013 
PMCID: PMC4452710
PMID: 26035716  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
