

1335. Eur J Cancer. 2010 Feb;46(3):625-35. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2009.11.005. Epub 2009
Dec 16.

Multimodal approach using oncolytic adenovirus, cetuximab, chemotherapy and
radiotherapy in HNSCC low passage tumour cell cultures.

Dias JD(1), Guse K, Nokisalmi P, Eriksson M, Chen DT, Diaconu I, Tenhunen M,
Liikanen I, Gr√©nman R, Savontaus M, Pesonen S, Cerullo V, Hemminki A.

Author information: 
(1)Transplantation Laboratory and Haartman Institute and Finnish Institute for
Molecular Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is a common and often devastating
disease without curative treatment when advanced or recurrent. The aim of this
study was to assess whether capsid-modified oncolytic adenoviruses have
therapeutic efficacy in HNSCC low passage tumour cell cultures and if it could be
further improved by combination with cetuximab, radiotherapy and chemotherapy. We
investigated which adenoviral capsid modifications allow best gene transfer and
cell killing of HNSCC substrates. Gene transfer was assessed using
replication-deficient adenoviruses expressing luciferase. Cell killing was
studied in vitro and in vivo using oncolytic adenoviruses, which kill tumour cell
by viral replication. The most effective capsid-modified oncolytic adenoviruses
were combined with HNSCC standard therapies and their efficacy was assessed in
vitro as well as in vivo. Cell killing was assessed in vitro by MTS assay and in 
vivo by HNSCC subcutaneous tumour growth follow-up in nude mice. Cetuximab
treatment was found to enrich CD133+ and CD44+ tumour-initiating type cells in
tumours grown in mice. Capsid-modified viruses showed increased transduction and 
oncolysis of HNSCC substrates in comparison to Ad5-based agents. Polylysine
(pK7)-modified oncolytic virus resulted in significant tumour growth reduction in
vivo. Combination of chemotherapy (cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil), radiotherapy
and cetuximab with oncolytic adenovirus therapy resulted in further increases in 
cell killing effect in vitro and complete eradication of tumours in vivo. Our
pre-clinical data suggest that it is feasible and efficacious to combine
oncolytic adenoviruses with HNSCC standard therapies into a multimodality
treatment regimen for clinical testing in HNSCC patients.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2009.11.005 
PMID: 20006487  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
