

1338. Rev Med Chil. 2013 Jul;141(7):917-21. doi: 10.4067/S0034-98872013000700012.

[Acute hepatitis due to infectious mononucleosis in a 21-year-old-man].

[Article in Spanish]

Modesto Dos Santos V(1), Da Costa Arruda Z Jr(1), De Farias Polcheira M(1), Da
Silva De Souza DW(1), Rodrigues Oliveira Santos AM(1), Santos CorrÃªa Da Costa
M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Catholic University Medical Course, Brasilia, DF, Brazil.
(2)Internal Medicine Department, Armed Forces Hospital, Brasilia, DF, Brazil.

A 21-year-old mole was admitted because of fever, fatigue, headache, pharyngitis,
abdominal pain, loss of appetite, vomiting and dark urine for three days. The
patient denied recent use of medicines or any other drug. His physical
examination disclosed jaundice, hepato-splenomegaly, whitish-yellow covered
tonsils, bilateral anterior and posterior cervical lymph node enlargement
associated with edema on the face and neck. Routine blood tests detected
abnormalities in serum bilirubins and liver enzymes (total bilirubin: 14.5 mg/dl,
direct-reacting bilirubin: 12.9 mg/dl, AST: 697 U/l, ALT: 619 U/l, alkaline
phosphatases: 260 U/l, and GGT: 413 U/l). Serological tests showed negative
results for viral hepatitis, cytomegalovirus, HIV-1 and HIV-2, and toxoplasmosis 
markers, while serology for recent infection by EBV was positive (IgM: 70 and 29 
U/ml; EBV IgG: 25 and 156 U/ml). Although infrequently, EBV infection can cause
acute hepatitis with accentuated cholestatic jaundice (5% of cases), which may
constitute an additional diagnostic challenge for primary care physicians. The
patient improved with supportive management and was discharged after 12 days.
This case study might contribute to increase the suspicion index about acute
hepatitis related to EBV.

DOI: 10.4067/S0034-98872013000700012 
PMID: 24356741  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
