

1339. Expert Opin Emerg Drugs. 2012 Dec;17(4):469-92. doi:
10.1517/14728214.2012.744393. Epub 2012 Nov 19.

Emerging human papillomavirus vaccines.

Ma B(1), Maraj B, Tran NP, Knoff J, Chen A, Alvarez RD, Hung CF, Wu TC.

Author information: 
(1)The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Departments of Pathology, Baltimore,
MD, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Identification of human papillomavirus (HPV) as the etiologic
factor of cervical, anogenital, and a subset of head and neck cancers has
stimulated the development of preventive and therapeutic HPV vaccines to control 
HPV-associated malignancies. Excitement has been generated by the
commercialization of two preventive L1-based vaccines, which use HPV virus-like
particles (VLPs) to generate capsid-specific neutralizing antibodies. However,
factors such as high cost and requirement for cold chain have prevented
widespread implementation where they are needed most.
AREAS COVERED: Next generation preventive HPV vaccine candidates have focused on 
cost-effective stable alternatives and generating broader protection via
targeting multivalent L1 VLPs, L2 capsid protein, and chimeric L1/L2 VLPs.
Therapeutic HPV vaccine candidates have focused on enhancing T cell-mediated
killing of HPV-transformed tumor cells, which constitutively express HPV-encoded 
proteins, E6 and E7. Several therapeutic HPV vaccines are in clinical trials.
EXPERT OPINION: Although progress is being made, cost remains an issue inhibiting
the use of preventive HPV vaccines in countries that carry the majority of the
cervical cancer burden. In addition, progression of therapeutic HPV vaccines
through clinical trials may require combination strategies employing different
therapeutic modalities. As research in the development of HPV vaccines continues,
we may generate effective strategies to control HPV-associated malignancies.

DOI: 10.1517/14728214.2012.744393 
PMCID: PMC3786409
PMID: 23163511  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
