

134. J Gen Virol. 2016 Nov;97(11):2949-2956. doi: 10.1099/jgv.0.000611. Epub 2016 Sep 
21.

Prevalence of human papillomavirus types, viral load and physical status of HPV16
in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma from the South Swedish Health Care
Region.

Faust H(1), Eldenhed Alwan E(2), Roslin A(2), Wennerberg J(2), Forslund O(1).

Author information: 
(1)1​Division of Medical Microbiology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund
University, Skane Laboratory Medicine, Sölvegatan 23, 221 85 Lund, Sweden.
(2)2​Division of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Department of
Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Skane University Hospital, Lasarettsgatan 21,
221 85 Lund, Sweden.

Incidence of human papillomavirus (HPV)-positive head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) is rising in several countries. Intriguingly, large variations 
of HPV16 viral load and different proportions of the physical viral status among 
HNSCC have been reported. We analysed fresh biopsies of 275 HNSCC patients from
the South Swedish Health Care Region for HPV types with modified general primer
PCR and Luminex. Seventy-eight HPV16-positive HNSCC cases were further
investigated for viral DNA load and physical status using quantitative PCR for
HPV E2 and E7 genes. Presence of intact E2 gene, as a surrogate marker for
episomal HPV, was investigated with conventional PCR. Fifteen different HPV types
were detected in HNSCC cases and HPV16 was present in 74 % of the HPV-positive
cases. HPV was detected in 65 % (92/141) and 11 % (15/134) of oropharyngeal and
non-oropharyngeal carcinomas, respectively (P<0.0001). HPV was detected in 73 %
(75/103) of tonsillar carcinomas. The median load of HPV16 was 13 copies cell-1
(range 0.003-1080). Among HPV16-positive patients with oropharyngeal carcinoma,
metastases to regional lymph nodes were observed in 100 % (17/17) and 68 %
(40/58) for those with <1 HPV16 copy cell-1 and >1 HPV16 copy cell-1,
respectively (P=0.007). Among HPV16 cases, purely integrated HPV16 was found in
6 %, whereas entirely episomal and mixed virus was detected in 51 and 42 % of
cases, respectively. Conclusively, HPV16 viral DNA load demonstrated a large
diversity among HNSCCs. Although integration of HPV16 is common (48 %), the
episomal HPV16 is salient (93 %) among HPV16 HNSCCs. In addition, low amount of
HPV16 was associated with lymph node metastases among oropharyngeal carcinomas.

DOI: 10.1099/jgv.0.000611 
PMID: 27667722  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
