

1345. Hematol Oncol. 2017 Dec;35(4):655-663. doi: 10.1002/hon.2360. Epub 2016 Oct 6.

Circulating Epstein-Barr virus-encoded micro-RNAs as potential biomarkers for
nasal natural killer/T-cell lymphoma.

Komabayashi Y(1), Kishibe K(1), Nagato T(1), Ueda S(1), Takahara M(1), Harabuchi 
Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Asahikawa Medical
University, Asahikawa, Japan.

Nasal natural killer/T-cell lymphoma (NNKTL) is an Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV)-associated malignancy and is characterized by local invasion and widespread
dissemination, with a consequent poor prognosis. Micro-RNAs (miRNAs) play roles
in the pathogenesis of several malignancies by regulating gene expression and
have been recently identified as stable entities in serum. Here, we investigated 
the value of circulating EBV-miRNAs as biomarkers for NNKTL. Sera of patients
with NNKTL were subjected to miRNA polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-array
analysis, after which serum EBV-miRNA levels were verified using quantitative
PCR. The latter analysis revealed high miR-BART2-5p, miR-BART7-3p, miR-BART13-3p,
and miR-BART1-5p expression levels in sera of patients with NNKTL and indicated
accurate values for discriminating patients with NNKTL from healthy controls.
Levels of these 4 EBV-miRNAs, which were secreted from NNKTL cells, significantly
decreased after treatment compared with those before treatment. Furthermore, a
high circulating miR-BART2-5p level was associated with disease progression and
poor prognosis in patients with NNKTL. Our findings demonstrate that circulating 
EBV-miRNAs, particularly miR-BART2-5p, may serve as potential diagnostic and
prognostic biomarkers in patients with NNKTL.

Copyright Â© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/hon.2360 
PMID: 27709652  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
