

1346. Auris Nasus Larynx. 2011 Oct;38(5):589-99. doi: 10.1016/j.anl.2011.01.018. Epub
2011 Feb 27.

Examination of the optimal condition on the in vitro sensitivity to telomelysin
in head and neck cancer cell lines.

Sakakibara A(1), Tsukuda M, Kondo N, Ishiguro Y, Kimura M, Fujita K, Takahashi H,
Matsuda H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Function in the Head and Neck, Yokohama City
University Graduate School of Medicine, 3-9 Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama,
Japan. t076024e@yokohama-cu.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: Telomelysin (OBP-301) is a telomerase-specific replication-competent
adenovirus with a human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) promoter.
Telomelysin has a strong antitumor effect on a variety of cancers, including head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), and combining telomelysin treatment
with paclitaxel or cisplatin enhances the antitumor effect on HNSCC. In the
present study, we investigated the relationship between the antitumor activity of
telomelysin and tumor cell doubling time(DT), S-phase fraction, and E1A
expression. We also investigated whether the antitumor effects of
OBP-301-resistant tumor cells are enhanced by cisplatin, paclitaxel, or
streptolysin O.
METHODS: The tumor cell DT of 17 human HNSCC cell lines was examined. Antitumor
activities of telomelysin (OBP-301) for each HNSCC cell line were examined by MTT
assay. Cell cycle analysis was conducted by flowcytometry. E1A gene expressions
after infection with telomelysin, hTERT, CAR (Cocksackie Adenovirus Receptor),
and c-Myc were examined by quantitative PCR, and E1A expressions were examined
again after pretreatment with cisplatin, paclitaxel, or streptolysin O.
Correlations were analyzed by Spearman's correlation coefficient.
RESULTS: There was a significant relationship between telomelysin sensitivity and
DT, S-phase fraction and early E1A expression, and pretreatment with cisplatin,
paclitaxel, and streptolysin O increased infectivity of telomelysin-resistant
HNSCC cell lines.
CONCLUSION: These findings are useful for advancing clinical trials, and suggest 
that adjuvant telomelysin treatment would be effective even in
telomelysin-resistant HNSCC cell lines.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anl.2011.01.018 
PMID: 21362583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
