

1356. Viruses. 2015 Mar 20;7(3):1332-43. doi: 10.3390/v7031332.

Human papillomavirus and tonsillar and base of tongue cancer.

Ramqvist T(1), GrÃ¼n N(2), Dalianis T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Cancer Center
Karolinska R8:01, Karolinska University Hospital, 171 76 Stockholm, Sweden.
Torbjorn.Ramqvist@ki.se.
(2)Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Cancer Center
Karolinska R8:01, Karolinska University Hospital, 171 76 Stockholm, Sweden.
Nathalie.Grun@ki.se.
(3)Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Cancer Center
Karolinska R8:01, Karolinska University Hospital, 171 76 Stockholm, Sweden.
Tina.Dalianis@ki.se.

In 2007, human papillomavirus (HPV) type 16 was recognized as a risk factor by
the International Agency for Research on Cancer, for oropharyngeal squamous cell 
carcinoma (OSCC), where tonsillar and base of tongue cancer (TSCC and BOTSCC)
dominate. Furthermore, patients with HPV-positive TSCC and BOTSCC, had a much
better clinical outcome than those with corresponding HPV-negative cancer and
other head and neck cancer. More specifically, survival was around 80% for
HPV-positive TSCC and BOTSCC vs. 40% five-year disease free survival, for the
corresponding HPV-negative tumors with conventional radiotherapy and surgery,
while this could not be observed for HPV-positive OSCC at other sites. In
addition, the past 20-40 years in many Western Countries, the incidence of
HPV-positive TSCC and BOTSCC has risen, and >70% are men. This has resulted in a 
relative increase of patients with HPV-positive TSCC and BOTSCC that may not need
the intensified chemo-radiotherapy (with many more severe debilitating side
effects) often given today to patients with head and neck cancer. However, before
tapering therapy, one needs to enable selection of patients for such treatment,
by identifying clinical and molecular markers that together with HPV-positive
status will better predict patient prognosis and response to therapy. To
conclude, there is a new increasing group of patients with HPV-positive TSCC and 
BOTSCC with good clinical outcome, where options for better-tailored therapy are 
needed. For prevention, it would be of benefit to vaccinate both girls and boys
against HPV16 infection. For potential future screening the ways to do so need
optimizing.

DOI: 10.3390/v7031332 
PMCID: PMC4379573
PMID: 25803099  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
