

1359. Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2013 Jun;36(3):213-24. doi: 10.1007/s13402-013-0129-5. Epub
2013 Mar 26.

Protein expression and promoter methylation of the candidate biomarker TCF21 in
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Weiss D(1), Stockmann C, Schrödter K, Rudack C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University of
Münster, Kardinal-von-Galen-Ring 10, 48149, Münster, Germany.
daniel.weiss@ukmuenster.de

PURPOSE: Epigenetic alterations of the transcription factor 21 (TCF21) gene have 
been associated with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) and other
tumor entities. So far, however, no reports have appeared in the literature on
TCF21 protein expression in HNSCC and its relevance as a putative biomarker.
METHODS: TCF21 protein expression was assessed in 74 HNSCCs and 31 benign tonsils
by immunohistochemistry. Methylation analyses of the corresponding gene promoter 
were performed in 45 HNSCCs and 31 benign tonsils. The TCF21 expression levels in
the tumors and controls were compared with each other and within each group and, 
in addition, with the TCF21 promoter methylation status and various
clinicopathological characteristics.
RESULTS: Overall, both the expression levels and methylation frequencies of TCF21
were significantly higher in the HNSCCs than in the benign controls (p < 0.001
each). Specifically, TCF21 promoter hypermethylation resulted in a reduced
protein expression in a subgroup of the HNSCCs (p = 0.038), but not in the
tonsils. In the tonsils, TCF21 protein expression positively correlated with that
of CD31 (p = 0.039), a marker for blood vessels. Also, in the tonsils the TCF21
protein methylation frequency showed a positive correlation with age (p = 0.008).
The HNSCCs of patients with a positive history for alcohol and nicotine abuse
showed higher TCF21 protein expression levels than their respective counterparts 
(p = 0.028 and p = 0.062, respectively). The same was observed in human papilloma
virus (HPV)-negative tumors (p = 0.042), tumors located in the oral cavity
(p = 0.016) and early-stage tumors (p = 0.025). Interestingly, expression rates
in tumors of the oropharynx, where HPV-positive tumors were most frequently
found, tended to be lower (p = 0.065). The methylation frequencies of TCF21 were 
found to be significantly higher in tumors of patients without nicotine abuse
(p = 0.030), in HPV-positive tumors (p = 0.014) and in tumors exhibiting
over-expression of p16, a protein induced by HPV (p = 0.006).
CONCLUSIONS: Both over-expression and increased promoter methylation of TCF21
were frequently observed in HNSCCs. TCF21 promoter hypermethylation was found to 
lead to gene silencing in the HNSCCs, but not in the benign tonsils. These
epigenetic, and possibly also genetic, alterations of the TCF21 gene in HNSCCs
may be driven by HPV infection, nicotine and alcohol abuse, or both. These
findings, together with its stage- and primary site-dependent expression, turn
TCF21 into a promising candidate biomarker in HNSCC.

DOI: 10.1007/s13402-013-0129-5 
PMID: 23529585  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
