

1360. World J Surg Oncol. 2017 Aug 25;15(1):163. doi: 10.1186/s12957-017-1225-1.

Heavy alcohol drinking downregulates ALDH2 gene expression but heavy smoking
up-regulates SOD2 gene expression in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Lee DJ(1), Lee HM(2), Kim JH(2), Park IS(2), Rho YS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolrayngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Kangnam Sacred Heart
Hospital, Hallym University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
leesurgery@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Otolrayngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Kangnam Sacred Heart
Hospital, Hallym University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.

BACKGROUND: This study aims to determine the relationship between expression
levels of ALDH2 and SOD2 genes and clinical parameters such as alcohol drinking, 
tobacco smoking, primary site of HNSCC, and human papilloma virus (HPV) state.
METHODS: Gene expression data were obtained from gene expression omnibus (GEO
accession number: GSE65858). Clinical data (N = 270) including survival result,
gender, age, TNM stage, primary site of HNSCC, HPV status, alcohol drinking, and 
tobacco smoking habit were analyzed according to gene expression pattern.
RESULTS: ALDH2 gene was expressed in low levels in patients with heavy alcohol
consumption. It was expressed in high (p = 0.01) levels in patients with no or
light alcohol consumption. ALDH2 gene was also expressed in low levels in
patients with oral cavity cancers or hypopharynx cancers. However, ALDH2 gene was
expressed in high (p = 0.03) levels in patients with oropharyngeal cancers or
laryngeal cancers. HPV-positive patients were found to have high (p = 0.02)
expression levels of ALDH2. SOD2 gene was expressed in high (p = 0.005) levels in
patients who had greater mean pack-year of tobacco smoking. Based on log rank
test, the group of patients with high expression of ALDH2 showed better
(p = 0.002) clinical results than those with low expression of ALDH2. Difference 
of survival results between ALDH2 high-expressed group and ALDH2 low-expressed
group was validated in another cohort (GSE39368, N = 138).
CONCLUSIONS: Heavy alcohol drinking downregulates ALDH2 gene expression level.
Heavy smoking up-regulates SOD2 gene expression level in patients with head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma. The group of patients with low expression levels of
ALDH2 showed significantly poorer survival results compared to those with high
expression levels of ALDH2.

DOI: 10.1186/s12957-017-1225-1 
PMID: 28841898  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
