

1361. J Clin Invest. 2009 Jul;119(7):1974-85. doi: 10.1172/JCI33816.

Molecular disruption of RAD50 sensitizes human tumor cells to cisplatin-based
chemotherapy.

Abuzeid WM(1), Jiang X, Shi G, Wang H, Paulson D, Araki K, Jungreis D, Carney J, 
O'Malley BW Jr, Li D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine,Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Erratum in
    J Clin Invest. 2012 Nov;122(11):4300.

Platinum-based drugs that induce DNA damage are commonly used first-line
chemotherapy agents for testicular, bladder, head and neck, lung, esophageal,
stomach, and ovarian cancers. The inherent resistance of tumors to DNA damage
often limits the therapeutic efficacy of these agents, such as cisplatin. An
enhanced DNA repair and telomere maintenance response by the Mre11/Rad50/Nbs1
(MRN) complex is critical in driving this chemoresistance. We hypothesized
therefore that the targeted impairment of native cellular MRN function could
sensitize tumor cells to cisplatin. To test this, we designed what we believe to 
be a novel dominant-negative adenoviral vector containing a mutant RAD50 gene
that significantly downregulated MRN expression and markedly disrupted MRN
function in human squamous cell carcinoma cells. A combination of cisplatin and
mutant RAD50 therapy produced significant tumor cytotoxicity in vitro, with a
corresponding increase in DNA damage and telomere shortening. In
cisplatin-resistant human squamous cell cancer xenografts in nude mice, this
combination therapy caused dramatic tumor regression with increased apoptosis.
Our findings suggest the use of targeted RAD50 disruption as what we believe to
be a novel chemosensitizing approach for cancer therapy in the context of
chemoresistance. This strategy is potentially applicable to several types of
malignant tumors that demonstrate chemoresistance and may positively impact the
treatment of these patients.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI33816 
PMCID: PMC2701852
PMID: 19487811  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
