

1365. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2013 Jun;139(6):617-22. doi:
10.1001/jamaoto.2013.3210.

High frequency of activating PIK3CA mutations in human papillomavirus-positive
oropharyngeal cancer.

Nichols AC(1), Palma DA, Chow W, Tan S, Rajakumar C, Rizzo G, Fung K, Kwan K,
Wehrli B, Winquist E, Koropatnick J, Mymryk JS, Yoo J, Barrett JW.

Author information: 
(1)Victoria Hospital, London Health Science Centre, Department of
Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery, Room B3-431A, 800 Commissioners Rd E,
London, ON N6A 5W9, Canada. Anthony.Nichols@lhsc.on

IMPORTANCE: Large-scale whole-exome sequencing studies of head and neck squamous 
cell carcinoma (HNSCC) have established that the disease is dominated by frequent
mutations in tumor suppressor genes with rare activating mutations in oncogenes
that would be easily targetable with molecular agents. There was evidence in
these reports, however, that activating mutations in phosphoinositide 3-kinase
catalytic subunit p110α (PIK3CA) were common in patients with human
papillomavirus (HPV)-positive tumors. We set out to test this prediction in
oropharyngeal patient samples from our institution.
OBJECTIVE: To confirm whether activating mutations in PIK3CA are frequent in
HPV-positive HNSCC because this mutated oncogene represents a potential
therapeutic target.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: A retrospective search of the London Health
Sciences Centre pathology database was performed to identify oropharyngeal cancer
samples. DNA from pretreatment primary site biopsy samples from 87 patients were 
tested for high-risk HPV types 16 and 18 by real-time polymerase chain reaction.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Samples were tested for activating mutations at the 3
mutational hot spots (codons 542, 545, and 1047) by polymerase chain reaction
followed by Sanger sequencing using forward and reverse primers.
RESULTS: Only 4 of 41 HPV-negative tumors (10%) demonstrated PIK3CA hot spot
mutations, including 3 at codon 1047 and 1 at codon 542. Of 46 HPV-positive
tumors, 13 (28%) demonstrated activating PIK3CA mutations, including 7 at codon
542, 5 at codon 545, and 1 at codon 1047. The difference in PIK3CA mutation
frequency was significantly different between HPV-positive and HPV-negative
cancers (P = .03).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Although there has been a suggestion that activating
PIK3CA mutations are common in HPV-positive HNSCC, to our knowledge, this is the 
first study to clearly identify this phenomenon. Targeting PIK3CA with molecular 
agents in HPV-positive patients may be a mechanism to improve cure rates and
decrease treatment toxic effects in this rapidly growing cohort of patients.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaoto.2013.3210 
PMID: 23787421  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
