

1372. Am J Surg Pathol. 2017 Dec;41(12):1722-1728. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000929.

Nonuniform Distribution of High-risk Human Papillomavirus in Squamous Cell
Carcinomas of the Oropharynx: Rethinking the Anatomic Boundaries of Oral and
Oropharyngeal Carcinoma From an Oncologic HPV Perspective.

Gelwan E(1), Malm IJ, Khararjian A, Fakhry C, Bishop JA, Westra WH.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology †Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery ‡Oncology, The
Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD.

The oral cavity and oropharynx have historically been viewed as a single anatomic
compartment of the head and neck. The practice of combining the oral cavity and
oropharynx has recently been revised, largely owing to the observation that human
papillomavirus (HPV)-related carcinogenesis has a strong predilection for the
oropharynx but not the oral cavity. The purpose of this study was to determine
whether HPV is evenly distributed across squamous cell carcinomas of the
oropharynx including those sites that do not harbor tonsillar tissues such as the
soft palate. A search of the medical records of the Johns Hopkins Hospital
identified 32 primary squamous cell carcinomas of the soft palate (n=31) and
posterior pharyngeal wall (n=1). All were evaluated with p16 immunohistochemistry
and high-risk HPV in situ hybridization (ISH) (29 by RNA ISH and 3 by DNA ISH).
For comparison, we also reviewed the medical records to obtain the HPV status of 
patients who had undergone HPV testing of primary tonsillar carcinomas over the
same time interval as part of their clinical care. High-risk HPV as detected by
ISH was present in just 1 (3.1%) of the 32 oropharyngeal squamous cell
carcinomas, including 1 of 2 p16-positive carcinomas. The difference in HPV
detection rates between tonsillar and nontonsillar sites was significant (1/32,
3.1% vs. 917/997, 92%; P<0.0001). HPV is not frequently detected in squamous cell
carcinomas arising from nontonsillar regions of the oropharynx. Indeed, squamous 
cell carcinomas of the soft palate more closely resemble those arising in the
oral cavity than those arising in areas of the oropharynx harboring tonsillar
tissue. This finding not only further sharpens our understanding of site-specific
targeting by HPV, but may have practical implications regarding HPV testing and
even the way the oral vault is oncologically compartmentalized to partition
HPV-positive from HPV-negative cancers.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000929 
PMID: 28877058  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
