

1376. Med Oncol. 2016 Aug;33(8):83. doi: 10.1007/s12032-016-0800-6. Epub 2016 Jun 27.

Effect of human papillomavirus 16 oncoproteins on oncostatin M upregulation in
oral squamous cell carcinoma.

Chuerduangphui J(1)(2), Pientong C(1)(2), Chaiyarit P(3)(4), Patarapadungkit
N(5)(2), Chotiyano A(6)(2), Kongyingyoes B(7), Promthet S(8)(2), Swangphon
P(1)(2), Wongjampa W(1)(2), Ekalaksananan T(9)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon
Kaen, Thailand.
(2)HPV & EBV and Carcinogenesis Research Group, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, 
Thailand.
(3)Department of Oral Diagnosis, Faculty of Dentistry, Khon Kaen University, Khon
Kaen, Thailand.
(4)Research Group of Chronic Inflammatory Oral Diseases and Systemic Diseases
Associated with Oral Health, Faculty of Dentistry, Khon Kaen University, Khon
Kaen, Thailand.
(5)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen,
Thailand.
(6)Anatomical Pathology Unit, Khon Kaen Hospital, Khon Kaen, Thailand.
(7)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon
Kaen, Thailand.
(8)Department of Epidemiology, Faculty of Public Health, Khon Kaen University,
Khon Kaen, Thailand.
(9)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon
Kaen, Thailand. tipeka@kku.ac.th.
(10)HPV & EBV and Carcinogenesis Research Group, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen,
Thailand. tipeka@kku.ac.th.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection modulates several host cytokines
contributing to cancer development. Oncostatin M (OSM), an IL-6 family cytokine, 
acts to promote cell senescence and inhibit growth. Its dysregulation promotes
cell survival, cell proliferation and metastasis in various malignancies. The
effect of HPV on OSM dysregulation has not been investigated. To elucidate this, 
immunohistochemistry was used on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded oral squamous 
cell carcinoma (OSCC) tissues: HPV-positive (50) and HPV-negative (50) cases.
Immortalized human cervical keratinocytes expressing HPV16E6 (HCK1T, Tet-On
system) were used to demonstrate the role of HPV16E6 in OSM expression. In
addition, a vector containing HPV16E6/E7 was transiently transfected into oral
cancer cell lines. Cell viability, cell-cycle progression and cell migration were
evaluated using flow cytometry and a wound healing assay, respectively. The
results showed various intensities of OSM expression in OSCC. Interestingly, the 
median percentages of strongly stained cells were significantly higher in
HPV-positive OSCCs than in HPV-negative OSCCs. To explore the role of HPV
oncoproteins on OSM expression, the expression of HPV16E6 in the HCK1T Tet-On
condition was induced by doxycycline and HPV16E6 was found to significantly
upregulate levels of OSM mRNA and protein, with concomitant upregulation of
c-Myc. In addition, the levels of OSM mRNA and protein in E6/E7 transiently
transfected oral cancer cells also gradually increased in a time-dependent manner
and these transfected cells showed greater viability and higher migration rates
and cell-cycle progression than controls. This result demonstrates that HPV16
oncoproteins upregulate OSM and play an important role to promote OSCC
development.

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-016-0800-6 
PMID: 27349249  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
