

1380. Oncol Rep. 2014 Dec;32(6):2673-9. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3509. Epub 2014 Sep 22.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition in human papillomavirus-positive and -negative 
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma.

Hatakeyama H(1), Mizumachi T(1), Sakashita T(1), Kano S(1), Homma A(1), Fukuda
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Hokkaido University
Graduate School of Medicine, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan.

High-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is associated with carcinogenesis 
in oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) and patients with HPV-positive
tumors have a significantly favorable prognosis. However, the underlying
mechanism of this favorable clinical outcome remains unclear.
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) causes aggressiveness of cancer cells and
we investigated the expression of the EMT markers and analyzed their correlation 
with HPV status and prognosis in order to examine the treatment response of
HPV-positive OPSCCs. A total of 79 patients with OPSCC were examined in the
present study. All high-risk HPV infections were determined with the multiplex
PCR kit from each formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) sample. We performed
immunohistochemical staining for E-cadherin and vimentin. Expression of the
markers was graded and we statistically analyzed the correlation between tumor,
node, metastasis (TNM) stages and prognosis. High-risk HPV-positive tumors were
detected in 23 cases. The five‑year survival rate in HPV-positive and -negative
tumors was 82.7 and 48.3%, respectively. High E-cadherin expression rate in
HPV-negative samples was 76.7% and 43.4% in HPV-positive samples (p=0.007).
Vimentin expression did not show a difference between HPV-positive and -negative 
tumors. HPV-negative patients presented significantly greater heterogeneity of
E-cadherin expression compared to HPV-positive patients (p=0.0349). HPV-positive 
OPSCCs originally lost their epithelial cell phenotype compared with HPV-negative
tumors. Therefore, the paradoxical favorable prognosis of HPV-positive OPSCC may 
be due to the intratumor homogeneity in EMT.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2014.3509 
PMID: 25241968  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
