

1384. Epigenetics. 2011 Jun;6(6):777-87. Epub 2011 Jun 1.

Genome-wide methylation and expression differences in HPV(+) and HPV(-) squamous 
cell carcinoma cell lines are consistent with divergent mechanisms of
carcinogenesis.

Sartor MA(1), Dolinoy DC, Jones TR, Colacino JA, Prince ME, Carey TE, Rozek LS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Oncogenic human papillomaviruses (HPV) are associated with nearly all cervical
cancers and are increasingly important in the etiology of oropharyngeal tumors.
HPV-associated head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) have distinct risk 
profiles and appreciate a prognostic advantage compared to HPV-negative HNSCC.
Promoter hypermethylation is widely recognized as a mechanism in the progression 
of HNSCC, but the extent to which this mechanism is consistent between HPV(+) and
HPV(-) tumors is unknown. To investigate the epigenetic regulation of gene
expression in HPV-induced and carcinogen-induced cancers, we examined genome-wide
DNA methylation and gene expression in HPV(+) and HPV(-) SCC cell lines. We used 
two platforms: the Illumina Infinium Methylation BeadArray and tiling arrays, and
confirmed illustrative examples with pyrosequencing and quantitative PCR. These
analyses indicate that HPV(+) cell lines have higher DNA methylation in genic and
LINE-1 regions than HPV(-) cell lines. Differentially methylated loci between
HPV(+) and HPV(-) cell lines significantly correlated with HPV-typed HNSCC
primary tumor DNA methylation levels. Novel findings include higher promoter
methylation of polycomb repressive complex 2 target genes in HPV(+) cells
compared to HPV(-) cells and increased expression of DNMT3A in HPV(+) cells.
Additionally, CDKN2A and KRT8 were identified as interaction hubs among genes
with higher methylation and lower expression in HPV(-) cells. Conversely, RUNX2, 
IRS-1Â and CCNA1 were major hubs with higher methylation and lower expression in
HPV(+) cells. Distinct HPV(+) and HPV(-) epigenetic profiles should provide clues
to novel targets for development of individualized therapeutic strategies.


PMCID: PMC3142368
PMID: 21613826  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
