

1391. Oncogene. 2011 Mar 31;30(13):1518-30. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.529. Epub 2010 Nov
29.

FGF8b oncogene mediates proliferation and invasion of Epstein-Barr
virus-associated nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells: implication for viral-mediated
FGF8b upregulation.

Lui VW(1), Yau DM, Cheung CS, Wong SC, Chan AK, Zhou Q, Wong EY, Lau CP, Lam EK, 
Hui EP, Hong B, Hui CW, Chan AS, Ng PK, Ng YK, Lo KW, Tsang CM, Tsui SK, Tsao SW,
Chan AT.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Sir YK Pao Center for Cancer,
Department of Clinical Oncology, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.

The fibroblast growth factor 8b (FGF8b) oncogene is known to be primarily
involved in the tumorigenesis and progression of hormone-related cancers. Its
role in other epithelial cancers has not been investigated, except for esophageal
cancer, in which FGF8b overexpression was mainly found in tumor biopsies of male 
patients. These observations were consistent with previous findings in these
cancer types that the male sex-hormone androgen is responsible for FGF8b
expression. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a highly metastatic cancer of head 
and neck commonly found in Asia. It is etiologically associated with Epstein-Barr
Virus (EBV) infection, inflammatory tumor microenvironment and relatively higher 
male predominance. Here, we reported for the first time that FGF8b is
overexpressed in this EBV-associated non-hormone-related cancer of the head and
neck, NPC. More importantly, overexpression of FGF8b mRNA and protein was
detected in a large majority of NPC tumors from both male and female genders, in 
addition to multiple NPC cell lines. We hypothesized that FGF8b overexpression
may contribute to NPC tumorigenesis. Using EBV-associated NPC cell lines, we
demonstrated that specific knockdown of FGF8b by small interfering RNA inhibited 
cell proliferation, migration and invasion, whereas exogenous FGF8b stimulated
these multiple phenotypes. Further mechanistic investigation revealed that in
addition to NF-ÎºB signaling (a major inflammatory signaling pathway known to be
activated in NPC), an important EBV oncoprotein, the latent membrane protein 1
(LMP1), was found to be a direct inducer of FGF8b overexpression in NPC cells,
whereas androgen (testosterone) has minimal effect on FGF8b expression in
EBV-associated NPC cells. In summary, our study has identified LMP1 as the first 
viral oncogene capable of directly inducing FGF8b (an important cellular
oncogene) expression in human cancer cells. This novel mechanism of
viral-mediated FGF8 upregulation may implicate a new role of oncoviruses in human
carcinogenesis.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2010.529 
PMID: 21119603  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
