

140. West Afr J Med. 2014 Apr-Jun;33(2):121-4.

Human papillomavirus genotypes in a subset of head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma.

Kaba G(1), Dzudzor B, Gyasi RK, Asmah RH, Brown CA, Kudzi W, Wiredu EK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Laboratory Sciences, School of Allied Health Sciences,
College of Health Sciences, University of Ghana.

BACKGROUND: Squamous cell carcinoma originating from the oral cavity, lip, larynx
and pharynx are grouped under head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC).
OBJECTIVE: To report on human papillomavirus (HPV) genotypes involved in HNSCC.
STUDY DESIGN: A retrospective review of archival HNSCC specimens and patient
demographic and clinical data accessioned between January, 2007 and December,
2009 in the Department of Pathology, Korle-Bu Teaching Hospital, Accra, Ghana.
RESULTS: Cases from 58 males and 20 females included 29 from the oral cavity, 33 
from the larynx, 11 from the pharynx and 5 from the parotid gland. HPV DNA was
found in 15 (19.23%) of the tumors with 12 being HPV-16, 2 HPV-18 and 1 dual
infection with HPV-16 and HPV-18, giving HPV-16 prevalence of 86.7%. Higher
prevalence of HPV DNA was found in males than females. There was a trend towards 
subjects younger than 58 years being more likely to have HPV-positive tumors.The 
15 HPV-positive cases were distributed in location as 8 of 33 (24.2%) from the
larynx, 4 of 29 (13.8%) from the oral cavity, and 2 of 11 (18.2%) from the
pharynx and 1 of 5 (20%) from the parotid gland.
CONCLUSION: Oncogenic HPV infection was found in 19.23% of HNSCCs, with genotype 
16 predominating. HPV-related HNSCC tended to occur at younger age compared to
non-HPV-related HNSCC. The commonest site for HPV-associated HNSSC in Ghana is
the larynx, rather than the oropharynx as reported in other studies. Host factors
may be responsible for the site difference and more work is required to further
elucidate this.


PMID: 25236828  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
