

1400. Lancet Oncol. 2010 Aug;11(8):781-9. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(10)70017-6. Epub 2010
May 5.

HPV-associated head and neck cancer: a virus-related cancer epidemic.

Marur S(1), D'Souza G, Westra WH, Forastiere AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns
Hopkins, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA. smarur1@jhmi.edu

A rise in incidence of oropharyngeal squamous cell cancer--specifically of the
lingual and palatine tonsils--in white men younger than age 50 years who have no 
history of alcohol or tobacco use has been recorded over the past decade. This
malignant disease is associated with human papillomavirus (HPV) 16 infection. The
biology of HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer is distinct with P53 degradation,
retinoblastoma RB pathway inactivation, and P16 upregulation. By contrast,
tobacco-related oropharyngeal cancer is characterised by TP53 mutation and
downregulation of CDKN2A (encoding P16). The best method to detect virus in
tumour is controversial, and both in-situ hybridisation and PCR are commonly
used; P16 immunohistochemistry could serve as a potential surrogate marker.
HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer seems to be more responsive to chemotherapy and
radiation than HPV-negative disease. HPV 16 is a prognostic marker for enhanced
overall and disease-free survival, but its use as a predictive marker has not yet
been proven. Many questions about the natural history of oral HPV infection
remain under investigation. For example, why does the increase in HPV-related
oropharyngeal cancer dominate in men? What is the potential of HPV vaccines for
primary prevention? Could an accurate method to detect HPV in tumour be
developed? Which treatment strategies reduce toxic effects without compromising
survival? Our aim with this review is to highlight current understanding of the
epidemiology, biology, detection, and management of HPV-related oropharyngeal
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, and to describe unresolved issues.

2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(10)70017-6 
PMCID: PMC5242182
PMID: 20451455  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
