

1403. Scand J Immunol. 2010 Jul;72(1):22-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2010.02409.x.

Increasing antiviral activity of surfactant protein d trimers by introducing
residues from bovine serum collectins: dissociation of mannan-binding and
antiviral activity.

Hartshorn KL(1), White MR, Smith K, Sorensen G, Kuroki Y, Holmskov U, Head J,
Crouch EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA
02118, USA. khartsho@bu.edu

Collectins contribute to host defence through interactions with glycoconjugates
on pathogen surfaces. We have prepared recombinant trimeric neck and carbohydrate
recognition domains (NCRD) of collectins, and we now show that the NCRD of bovine
conglutinin and CL-46 (like that of CL-43) have greater intrinsic antiviral
activity for influenza A virus (IAV) than the human SP-D NCRD (hSP-D-NCRD). The
three serum collectins differ from SP-D by having insertions adjacent to amino
acid 325 and substitution of hydrophobic residues for arginine 343. We previously
showed that a three amino acid (RAK) insertion, as found in CL-43, increases
antiviral activity and mannan-binding activity of the hSP-D-NCRD, while the
substitution of valine at 343, as in conglutinin, more strongly increased these
activities. Mannan-binding activity of collectins has been considered to predict 
for ability to bind to high mannose glycans on viruses or other pathogens. We now
show, however, that combined mutants containing the RAK insertion and R343V or
R343I substitutions have greatly increased mannan-binding ability, but lower IAV 
binding or inhibiting activity than mutants containing R343V or R343I
substitutions only. These findings indicate differences in the recognition of
glycan structures of mannan and IAV by the NCRD and emphasize the importance of
the flanking sequences in determining the differing interactions of human SP-D
and bovine serum collectins with mannose-rich glycoconjugates on IAV and other
pathogens. Of interest, we show conservation of some monoclonal antibody-binding 
epitopes between bovine collectin NCRD and hSP-D, suggesting shared structural
motifs.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2010.02409.x 
PMCID: PMC3263973
PMID: 20591072  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
