

1409. Hum Pathol. 2012 Mar;43(3):327-32. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.05.010. Epub 2011 
Aug 12.

The relationship between p16 expression and high-risk human papillomavirus
infection in squamous cell carcinomas from sites other than uterine cervix: a
study of 137 cases.

Doxtader EE(1), Katzenstein AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, State University of New York Upstate Medical
University, Syracuse, NY 13210, USA. doxtadee@upstate.edu

p16 is known to be an excellent surrogate marker of human papillomavirus
infection in squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix. Recent studies have
demonstrated a link between human papillomavirus infection and a subset of head
and neck squamous cell carcinomas, especially from the oropharynx. The aims of
this study were to determine the incidence of p16 expression in squamous cell
carcinomas of noncervical origin and to assess its utility as a surrogate marker 
of human papillomavirus infection in various noncervical primary sites. One
hundred thirty-seven squamous cell carcinomas from 5 primary sites, including 34 
from the oropharynx (tonsil and base of tongue), 43 cases from nonoropharyngeal
head and neck sites, and 20 cases each from the lung, esophagus, and skin, were
retrieved from our surgical pathology archives. Immunohistochemistry for p16 was 
performed on each case. All p16-positive cases and 21 p16-negative cases were
further tested for both high-risk and low-risk human papillomavirus by in situ
hybridization. p16 expression was detected in 54 cases overall, including 25
(74%) of 34 oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas, 8 (19%) of 43
nonoropharyngeal head and neck squamous cell carcinomas including 3 of 4 from the
sinonasal cavity, 6 (30%) of 20 esophageal squamous cell carcinomas, 7 (35%) of
20 lung squamous cell carcinomas, and 8 (40%) of 20 skin squamous cell
carcinomas. Of the 54 p16-positive cases, 30 were positive for high-risk human
papillomavirus, including 24 (96%) of 25 from the oropharynx, 5 (63%) of 8 from
nonoropharyngeal head and neck sites, and 1 (17%) of 6 from the esophagus. All 7 
lung and 8 skin cases tested were negative. All p16-positive cases were negative 
for low-risk human papillomavirus. In selected head and neck squamous cell
carcinomas, mainly from the oropharynx and sinonasal cavity, p16 positivity
correlates well with high-risk human papillomavirus infection. p16 is not a
reliable indicator of high-risk human papillomavirus infection in squamous cell
carcinomas of the lung, skin, and esophagus.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.05.010 
PMID: 21840041  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
