

1413. Zhonghua Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2009 Mar;44(3):232-6.

[Clinicopathological features and prognosis of nasopharyngeal adenocarcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu WW(1), Guo ZM, Zeng ZY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Cancer Center of Sun Yat-sen University, 
Guangzhou 510060, China. drliuww@gmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the clinical manifestations, EB virus serology and
treatment outcome of nasopharyngeal adenocarcinoma (NPAC).
METHODS: Clinical records of NPAC patients between 1964 and 2000 in Cancer Center
of Sun Yat-sen University were retrospectively reviewed.
RESULTS: Among 48 patients with NPAC, 45.2% (7 cases of N1, 8 cases of N2 and 4
cases of N3) of them presented with cervical metastasis. Pathologically, common
type and salivary gland type of NPAC accounted for 58.3% (28 cases) and 41.7% (20
cases) respectively. The positive rate of the EB virus antibody VCA-IgA was 56.7%
in the whole group and only 23.7% in the salivary gland type of NPAC. The overall
local control rate and the 5-year disease free survival rate by Kaplan-Meier
method were 87.0% (40/46) and 65.2% respectively. Baseline data analysis showed
that age, gender, N stage and M stage were not the significant factors, never the
less the T stage was not balanced between the two groups (surgery plus
radiotherapy vs radiotherapy alone, chi2 = 4.801, P = 0.045). The patients
treated by surgery plus radiotherapy had significantly higher 5-year disease free
survival rate than by radiotherapy alone (88.9% vs 74.7%, Log Rank test: chi2 =
4.272, P = 0.039). Cox's multivariate analysis showed treatment modality and N
stage were the significant factors influencing survival (RR were 15.276 and
6.529, P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: NPAC is a distinct entity in all types of nasopharyngeal carcinoma. 
EB virus serology has limited value in its diagnosis. Surgery plus radiotherapy
could be another choice of treatment for early lesions of NPAC.


PMID: 19558864  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
