

1414. Oral Oncol. 2017 Aug;71:150-155. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2017.06.015. Epub
2017 Jun 26.

Predictive and prognostic value of CT based radiomics signature in locally
advanced head and neck cancers patients treated with concurrent chemoradiotherapy
or bioradiotherapy and its added value to Human Papillomavirus status.

Ou D(1), Blanchard P(2), Rosellini S(3), Levy A(2), Nguyen F(2), Leijenaar
RTH(4), Garberis I(5), Gorphe P(6), Bidault F(7), Ferté C(6), Robert C(2),
Casiraghi O(5), Scoazec JY(5), Lambin P(4), Temam S(6), Deutsch E(2), Tao Y(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France; 
Department of Radiation Oncology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center,
Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, MAASTRO Clinic, Research Institute GROW,
Maastricht University, 6229ET Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Pathology, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.
(6)Department of Head and Neck Oncology, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif,
France.
(7)Department of Radiology, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.
(8)Department of Radiation Oncology, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France. 
Electronic address: yungan.tao@gustaveroussy.fr.

OBJECTIVES: To explore prognostic and predictive value of radiomics in patients
with locally advanced head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (LAHNSCC) treated
with concurrent chemoradiotherapy (CRT) or bioradiotherapy (BRT).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Data of 120 patients (CRT vs. BRT matched 2:1) were
retrospectively analyzed. A total of 544 radiomics features of the primary tumor 
were extracted from radiotherapy planning computed tomography scans. Cox
proportional hazards models were used to examine the association between survival
and radiomics features with false discovery rate correction. The discriminatory
performance was evaluated using receiver operating characteristic curve analysis.
RESULTS: Multivariate analysis showed a 24-feature based signature significantly 
predicted for OS (HR=0.3, P=0.02) and progression-free survival (PFS) (HR=0.3,
P=0.01). Combining the radiomics signature with p16 status showed a significant
improvement of prognostic performance compared with p16 (AUC=0.78vs. AUC=0.64 at 
5years, P=0.01) or radiomics signature (AUC=0.78vs. AUC=0.67, P=0.01) alone. When
patients were stratified according to this combination, OS and PFS were
significantly different according to the 4 sub-types (p16+ with low/high
signature score; p16- with low/high signature score) (P<0.001). Patients with
high signature score significantly benefited from CRT (vs. BRT) in terms of OS
(P=0.004), while no benefit from CRT in patients with low signature score.
CONCLUSION: Our analysis suggests an added value of radiomics features as
prognostic and predictive biomarker in HNSCC treated with CRT/BRT. Moreover, the 
radiomics signature provided additional information to HPV/p16 status to further 
stratify patients. External validation of such findings is mandatory given the
risk of overfitting.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2017.06.015 
PMID: 28688683  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
