

1417. Oncotarget. 2017 Mar 14;8(11):17684-17699. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.15179.

Analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas sequencing data reveals novel properties of
the human papillomavirus 16 genome in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Nulton TJ(1), Olex AL(2), Dozmorov M(2)(3), Morgan IM(1)(4), Windle B(1)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Craniofacial Molecular Biology, VCU Philips Institute
for Oral Health Research, Virginia Commonwealth University School of Dentistry,
Richmond, VA, USA.
(2)C. Kenneth and Dianne Wright Center for Clinical and Translational Research,
Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA,
USA.
(4)Massey Cancer Center, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology, Oncology and
Palliative Care, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) DNA is detected in up to 80% of oropharyngeal
carcinomas (OPC) and this HPV positive disease has reached epidemic proportions. 
To increase our understanding of the disease, we investigated the status of the
HPV16 genome in HPV-positive head and neck cancers (HNC). Raw RNA-Seq and Whole
Genome Sequence data from The Cancer Genome Atlas HNC samples were analyzed to
gain a full understanding of the HPV genome status for these tumors. Several
remarkable and novel observations were made following this analysis. Firstly,
there are three main HPV genome states in these tumors that are split relatively 
evenly: An episomal only state, an integrated state, and a state in which the
viral genome exists as a hybrid episome with human DNA. Secondly, none of the
tumors expressed high levels of E6; E6*I is the dominant variant expressed in all
tumors. The most striking conclusion from this study is that around three
quarters of HPV16 positive HNC contain episomal versions of the viral genome that
are likely replicating in an E1-E2 dependent manner. The clinical and therapeutic
implications of these observations are discussed.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.15179 
PMCID: PMC5392278
PMID: 28187443  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
