

1423. Br J Cancer. 2010 Dec 7;103(12):1822-30. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605980. Epub 2010
Nov 9.

Molecular disruption of NBS1 with targeted gene delivery enhances
chemosensitisation in head and neck cancer.

Araki K(1), Yamashita T, Reddy N, Wang H, Abuzeid WM, Khan K, O'Malley BW Jr, Li 
D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 415 Curie Boulevard, CRB Room 145, Philadelphia,
PA 19104, USA.

BACKGROUND: a fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2)-targeted adenoviral system can
alter viral tropism and allow for improved transduction and reduced systemic
toxicity. This study is to investigate if the FGF2-targeted adenoviral mutant
Nijmegen breakage syndrome 1 (FGF2-Ad-NBS1) gene transfer can enhance cisplatin
chemosensitisation not only by targeting DNA repair, but also through the
induction of antiangiogenesis, whereas at the same time reducing toxicities in
treating head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC).
METHODS: the human HNSCC cell line was treated in vitro and in a nude mouse
xenograft model. We conducted verification of binding ability of mutant NBS1 and 
downregulation of MRN complex, evaluation of transduction efficiency and combined
antitumour activities. The antiangiogenesis mechanism was also investigated.
Finally, we estimated the distribution of adenoviral vector in the liver.
RESULTS: the mutant NBS1 protein retains the binding ability and effectively
suppresses the expression level of the MRN in infected cells. Transduction
efficiency in vitro and cisplatin chemosensitisation were upregulated. The
FGF2-Ad-NBS1 also showed detargeting the viral vectors away from the liver. The
downregulation of NF-ÎºB expression was supposed to correlate with increased
antiangiogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: FGF2-targeted adenoviral system enhances the cisplatin
chemosensitisation of mutant NBS1 and may avoid viral-associated liver
toxicities.

2010 Cancer Resaerch UK.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605980 
PMCID: PMC3008607
PMID: 21063405  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
