

1433. Cancer Biol Ther. 2009 Apr;8(8):676-82. Epub 2009 Apr 22.

A Phase I study of KH901, a conditionally replicating granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor: armed oncolytic adenovirus for the treatment of head
and neck cancers.

Chang J(1), Zhao X, Wu X, Guo Y, Guo H, Cao J, Guo Y, Lou D, Yu D, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai,
China.

BACKGROUND: KH901 is a conditionally replicating oncolytic adenovirus, which
reported selectively replicates in and lyses telomerase-positive tumor cells and 
expresses granulocyte macrophase colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). To determine
the safety, feasibility and biological activity of KH901, a conditionally
replicating oncolytic adenovirus, in patients with recurrent head and neck cancer
(HNC).
RESULTS: Treatment was well tolerated, with the main toxicity being grade 1/2
flu-like symptoms. Dose-limiting toxicity was not reached in either single dose
groups or multiple dose groups. KH901 was detected in urine, but little was found
in feces. Interestingly, a second peak of detectable KH901 genome found in the
circulation in majority of patients tested between 2 and 4 days after treatment. 
High level of GM-CSF in circulation was detected in all single dose patients 12 h
and became undetectable 15 days following injection. All 23 patients treated
showed an increase in neutralizing antibody to adenovirus.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Twenty-three patients with recurrent HNC was administered 
by intratumoral injection in two parts of trial. In the single dose escalating
portion, four cohort of 13 patients received a single injection of KH901 at a
dose of 3 x 10(11) virus particle (vp), 1 x 10(12) vp, 3 x 10(12) vp and 1 x
10(13) vp, respectively, while in the multiple dose portion each cohort of six
patients received twice weekly a total of six injections at a dose of either 1 x 
10(12) vp or 3 x 10(12) vp. Toxicity was assessed using NCIC criteria. Tumor
response was assessed by clinical and radiological measurement. Blood samples
were taken to detect adenovirus DNA, GM-CSF expression and neutralizing antibody 
to adenovirus.
CONCLUSIONS: These preliminary results showed that intratumoral administration of
KH901 was feasible, well tolerated and associated with biological activity,
further investigation of KH901, particularly in combination with systemic
chemotherapy, was warranted.


PMID: 19242097  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
