

1438. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2014 May;271(5):1219-25. doi:
10.1007/s00405-013-2641-7. Epub 2013 Jul 24.

Use of quantitative diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging to predict
human papilloma virus status in patients with oropharyngeal squamous cell
carcinoma.

Nakahira M(1), Saito N, Yamaguchi H, Kuba K, Sugasawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Saitama Medical University International 
Medical Center, 1397-1 Yamane, Hidaka, Saitama, 350-1298, Japan,
nakahiratosa59@yahoo.co.jp.

Although identification of human papilloma virus (HPV) status in oropharyngeal
squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) is essential in predicting treatment response, no
imaging modality can currently determine whether a tumor is HPV-related. In this 
retrospective study, 26 patients with OPSCC confined to the lateral wall or the
base of tongue underwent neck magnetic resonance imaging, using T1-, T2- and
diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI). Apparent diffusion coefficients (ADCs) in a
region of interest covering the largest available primary tumor area of OPSCC on 
a single slice of the ADC map were calculated using two b values (0 and 1,000
s/mm(2)). Mean and minimum ADCs were compared with HPV status, using p16
immunohistochemistry as a surrogate marker for HPV infection. Mean and minimum
ADCs for HPV(+) OPSCC were significantly lower than those for HPV(-) OPSCC. A
cut-off value of mean ADC for HPV(+) OPSCC of 1.027 Ã— 10(-3) mm(2)/s yielded
sensitivity and specificity of 83.33 and 78.57%, respectively. In conclusion, the
present study indicates that ADC could be used to predict HPV status in patients 
with OPSCC.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-013-2641-7 
PMID: 23880924  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
