

1449. Mutat Res. 2011 Jan 10;718(1-2):62-7. doi: 10.1016/j.mrgentox.2010.10.004. Epub
2010 Nov 4.

8-Oxoguanine DNA-glycosylase repair activity and expression: a comparison between
cryopreserved isolated lymphocytes and EBV-derived lymphoblastoid cell lines.

Mazzei F(1), Guarrera S, Allione A, Simonelli V, Narciso L, Barone F, Minoprio A,
Ricceri F, Funaro A, D'Errico M, Vogel U, Matullo G, Dogliotti E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environment and Primary Prevention, Istituto Superiore di
Sanit√†, Rome, Italy.

Several lines of evidence suggest an association between oxidative DNA-damage
repair capacity and cancer risk. In particular, a DNA-glycosylase assay for
removal of 8-oxoguanine (8-oxoG) in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) has
been successfully applied to identify populations with increased risk for lung
cancer and squamous cell carcinomas of head and neck. In order to verify whether 
EBV-transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCL) are a suitable surrogate for PBMC
in specific DNA-repair phenotypic assays, a validation trial was conducted. PBMC 
from 20 healthy subjects were collected and an aliquot was transformed with EBV
to obtain LCL. The ability of cell-free extracts from both cell types to incise a
3'-fluorescently labelled duplex oligonucleotide containing a single 8-oxoG (OGG 
assay) was evaluated. Since this activity is mediated predominantly by OGG1, the 
OGG1 gene expression was also measured. 8-oxoG DNA-glycosylase activity and OGG1 
expression were significantly higher (p<0.0001) in LCL than in PBMC. However,
while this assay was shown to be robust and reproducible when used on PBMC
(intra-assay CV=8%), a high intra-culture variability was observed with LCL
(intra-culture CV=16.8%). Neither differences on OGG1 gene expression nor the
cell-cycle distribution seemed to account for this variability. Inter-individual 
variability of OGG activity in PBMC and LCL was not associated with OGG1 gene
expression. We have therefore established a non-radioactive cleavage assay that
can be easily applied to measure OGG activity in human PBMC. The use of LCL for
DNA-repair genotype-phenotype correlation studies seems to be inappropriate, at
least with cell-free based functional assays.

2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mrgentox.2010.10.004 
PMID: 20971211  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
