

145. Virus Res. 2017 Mar 2;231:41-49. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2016.11.006. Epub 2016
Nov 9.

Modulation of the DNA damage response during the life cycle of human
papillomaviruses.

Anacker DC(1), Moody CA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center and the Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(2)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center and the Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC, USA. Electronic
address: camoody@med.unc.edu.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) is the most common sexually transmitted viral
infection. Infection with certain types of HPV pose a major public health risk as
these types are associated with multiple human cancers, including cervical
cancer, other anogenital malignancies and an increasing number of head and neck
cancers. The HPV life cycle is closely tied to host cell differentiation with
late viral events such as structural gene expression and viral genome
amplification taking place in the upper layers of the stratified epithelium. The 
DNA damage response (DDR) is an elaborate signaling network of proteins that
regulate the fidelity of replication by detecting, signaling and repairing DNA
lesions. ATM and ATR are two kinases that are major regulators of DNA damage
detection and repair. A multitude of studies indicate that activation of the ATM 
(Ataxia telangiectasia mutated) and ATR (Ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3-related) 
pathways are critical for HPV to productively replicate. This review outlines how
HPV interfaces with the ATM- and ATR-dependent DNA damage responses throughout
the viral life cycle to create an environment supportive of viral replication and
how activation of these pathways could impact genomic stability.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2016.11.006 
PMCID: PMC5325762
PMID: 27836727  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
