

1456. Semin Diagn Pathol. 2015 Sep;32(5):344-51. doi: 10.1053/j.semdp.2015.02.013. Epub
2015 Feb 4.

HPV-related squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck: An update on testing in
routine pathology practice.

Bishop JA(1), Lewis JS Jr(2), Rocco JW(3), Faquin WC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland; Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, The
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(2)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri; Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck
Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri.
(3)Department of Otology and Laryngology, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary,
Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts; Cancer Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts; Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)Department of Otology and Laryngology, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary,
Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Warren 219, 55 Fruit St, Boston, Massachusetts 02114; Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts. Electronic address: wfaquin@mgh.harvard.edu.

Oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma caused by high-risk types of human
papillomavirus (HPV) is now a well-recognized tumor entity whose incidence is on 
the rise. Most HPV-related oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas have a distinct
histomorphology, and most patients fit a typical clinical profile. Importantly,
HPV-related oropharyngeal carcinoma patients overall have significantly improved 
outcomes when compared to their HPV-negative counterparts, and the differences in
tumor biology may soon lead to modifications in how they are treated. While
high-risk HPV can be detected in a significant minority of head and neck squamous
cell carcinomas across anatomic subsites in the head and neck, it has become
clear in recent years that the biologically and clinically favorable features are
limited to tumors that harbor transcriptionally active, high-risk HPV, something 
that occurs predominantly (but certainly not exclusively) in the oropharynx. It
is now acknowledged that detecting transcriptionally active, high-risk HPV is a
necessity in routine clinical practice, but there is considerable confusion among
pathologists and clinicians alike about the subsites and settings in which HPV
testing should be performed. Compounding this lack of clarity is the fact that
there are multiple HPV testing options available, but currently there is no clear
consensus on which test or combination of tests is optimal for routine diagnostic
use. This review serves as an update for practicing pathologists on the current
status of HPV (and surrogate marker) testing in head and neck cancers.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.semdp.2015.02.013 
PMID: 25724476  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
