

1458. Sci Rep. 2015 Nov 13;5:16657. doi: 10.1038/srep16657.

TMEM16A/ANO1 is differentially expressed in HPV-negative versus HPV-positive head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma through promoter methylation.

Dixit R(1), Kemp C(1), Kulich S(2), Seethala R(3), Chiosea S(3), Ling S(4), Ha
PK(4), Duvvuri U(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania USA.
(2)VA Pittsburgh Healthcare System, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
USA.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland USA.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) has a variety of causes. Recently, 
the human papilloma virus (HPV) has been implicated in the rising incidence of
oropharyngeal cancer and has led to variety of studies exploring the differences 
between HPV-positive and HPV-negative HNSCC. The calcium-activated chloride
channel TMEM16A is overexpressed in a variety of cancers, including HNSCC, but
whether or not it plays different roles in HPV-positive and HPV-negative HNSCC is
unknown. Here, we demonstrate that TMEM16A is preferentially overexpressed in
HPV-negative HNSCC and that this overexpression of TMEM16A is associated with
decreased patient survival. We also show that TMEM16A expression is decreased in 
HPV-positive HNSCC at the DNA, RNA, and protein levels in patient samples as well
as cell lines. We demonstrate that the lower levels of TMEM16A expression in
HPV-positive tumors can be attributed to both a combination of copy number
alteration and promoter methylation at the DNA level. Additionally, our cellular 
data show that HPV-negative cell lines are more dependent on TMEM16A for survival
than HPV-positive cell lines. Therefore, we suspect that the down-regulation of
TMEM16A in HPV-positive HNSCC makes TMEM16A a poor therapeutic target in
HPV-positive HNSCC, but a potentially useful target in HPV-negative HNSCC.

DOI: 10.1038/srep16657 
PMCID: PMC4643216
PMID: 26563938  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
