

146. Vaccine. 2012 Nov 20;30 Suppl 5:F34-54. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.05.070.

Human papillomavirus and diseases of the upper airway: head and neck cancer and
respiratory papillomatosis.

Gillison ML(1), Alemany L, Snijders PJ, Chaturvedi A, Steinberg BM, Schwartz S,
Castellsagué X.

Author information: 
(1)Viral Oncology, The Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Columbus, OH, USA. Maura.gillison@osumc.edu

Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is causally associated with benign and
malignant diseases of the upper airway, including respiratory papillomatosis and 
oropharyngeal cancer. Low-risk HPV types 6 and 11 are the predominant cause of
papillomatosis, whereas only HPV16 definitively satisfies both molecular and
epidemiological causal criteria as a carcinogenic or high-risk type in the upper 
airway. HPV16 E6/E7 mRNA expression and integration are observed predominantly
among oropharyngeal cancers, and experimental models have shown E6/E7 expression 
to be necessary for the initiation and maintenance of the malignant phenotype of 
these cancers. From an epidemiological perspective, a strong and consistent
association between markers of HPV16 exposure and oropharyngeal cancer has been
demonstrated in numerous case-control studies. HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancers
have also been shown to be distinct from HPV-negative head and neck squamous cell
cancers with regard to risk-factor profiles, molecular genetic alterations,
population-level incidence trends over time, and prognosis. Tumor HPV status (as 
determined by certain HPV16 in situ hybridization assays or certain p16
immunohistochemistry assays) is the strongest determinant of survival for
patients with local-regionally advanced oropharyngeal cancer: patients with
HPV-positive cancer have at least a 50% improvement in overall survival at 5
years, which is equivalent to an approximate 30% difference in absolute survival.
Thus, HPV status determination is now part of the routine diagnostic evaluation
for prognostication. Preliminary evidence indicates that a small proportion of
head and neck cancers may be caused by additional HPV types (e.g., 18, 31, 33,
35) and that HPV-caused cancers may rarely arise from non-oropharyngeal sites
(e.g., the oral cavity, nasopharynx, and larynx). Whether or not HPV vaccination 
has the potential to prevent oral HPV infections that lead to cancer or
papillomatosis in the upper airway is currently unknown, as is the potential for 
secondary prevention with HPV detection. This article forms part of a special
supplement entitled "Comprehensive Control of HPV Infections and Related
Diseases" Vaccine Volume 30, Supplement 5, 2012.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.05.070 
PMID: 23199965  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
