

1464. Mol Cancer. 2017 Jun 29;16(1):113. doi: 10.1186/s12943-017-0678-8.

Dual role for p16 in the metastasis process of HPV positive head and neck
cancers.

Dok R(1), Glorieux M(1), Holacka K(1), Bamps M(1), Nuyts S(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Laboratory of Experimental Radiotherapy, KU Leuven,
University of Leuven, 3000, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Department of Oncology, Laboratory of Experimental Radiotherapy, KU Leuven,
University of Leuven, 3000, Leuven, Belgium. sandra.nuyts@uzleuven.be.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, Leuven Cancer Institute, UH Leuven,
Herestraat 49 box 815, 3000, Leuven, Belgium. sandra.nuyts@uzleuven.be.

Several studies show that human papillomavirus (HPV) positive head and neck
cancers (HNSCC) are typically characterized by low tumor and high regional node
stages, intrinsically indicating high local metastatic potential. Despite this,
the distant metastasis rates of HPV positive and negative HNSCC are similar. To
date, majority of the studies focus on molecular characterization of HPV positive
disease and on treatment outcome. Here we assessed the biological mechanisms of
metastasis by combining in vitro and in vivo head and neck carcinoma xenograft
models with patient data. We provide experimental evidence for a dual role of
p16, a surrogate marker for HPV infections, in the metastasis process of HNSCC.
We found that p16 regulates the invasiveness and metastatic potential of HNSCC
cells by impairing angiogenesis. In parallel, we found that p16 is regulating the
nodal spread by mediating lymphatic vessel formation through the upregulation of 
integrins. These findings not only provide understanding of the biology of the
different dissemination patterns but also suggest that inhibition of
lymphangiogenesis in HPV positive cancers and inhibition of angiogenesis in HPV
negative cancers can form a treatment strategy against metastasis.

DOI: 10.1186/s12943-017-0678-8 
PMCID: PMC5492443
PMID: 28662664  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
