

1470. Scand J Immunol. 2017 Mar;85(3):211-219. doi: 10.1111/sji.12518.

In vitro Monocyte IL-6 Secretion Levels Following Stimulation with Autologous
Spheroids Derived from Tumour or Benign Mucosa Predict Long-term Survival in Head
and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma Patients.

Aarstad HJ(1)(2), Aarstad HH(1)(2), Vintermyr OK(1)(3), Kross KW(4), Lybak
S(1)(2), Heimdal JH(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University
of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, Haukeland University
Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(3)Department of Pathology, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, Maastricht University
Medical Centre, Maastricht, The Netherlands.

MCP-1/IL-6 in vitro monocyte secretion upon coculture with autologous fragment
spheroids was studied in relation to patient 5- and 10-year overall survival
rates in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) patients (n = 65)
diagnosed between 1998 and 2005, nine of whom had an human papilloma virus (HPV) 
tumour infection. The spheroids were harvested from malignant or benign tissue
during primary surgery. Two weeks following surgery, freshly isolated autologous 
monocytes and benign or malignant spheroids were cocultured 24 h in vitro. The
IL-6 secretion was expressed as a fraction of the lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
response from the same batch of monocytes. HPV status was obtained by employing
PCR analyses of primary diagnostic blocks. IL-6/MCP-1 response levels were not
found to be dependent on HPV infection status. MCP-1 secretion did not predict
prognosis, nor did in vitro IL-6 monocyte background or LPS-stimulated IL-6
secretion. At 5-year observation, dichotomized IL-6 levels following monocyte
coculture, with both malignant and benign spheroids, showed a strong trend
towards predicting survival, that is a low monocyte malignant coculture response 
showed a survival of 31 ± 17 versus 58 ± 17% with a high such response
(P = 0.057). When studying monocyte IL-6 coculture responses evaluating benign
and malignant spheroid results statistically together, a prediction of survival
up to 10 years was found (hazard ratio = 0.48; confidence interval = 0.24-0.96;
P < 0.05) with double low IL-6 responses. This survival prediction was also
present after an adjustment for HPV tumour infection status. In conclusion,
monocyte IL-6 in vitro secretion in cocultures with autologous spheroids/serum
from HNSCCs predicted 5- and 10-year survivals, both with and without tumour HPV 
tumour adjustment.

© 2016 The Foundation for the Scandinavian Journal of Immunology.

DOI: 10.1111/sji.12518 
PMID: 27943380  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
