

1472. Eur J Cancer. 2017 Jun;78:105-115. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2017.03.021. Epub 2017 Apr
20.

Primary, secondary and tertiary prevention of human papillomavirus-driven head
and neck cancers.

Mirghani H(1), Jung AC(2), Fakhry C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, Gustave Roussy Cancer
Campus, 114 rue Edouard Vaillant, Villejuif, France. Electronic address:
haitham.mirghani@gustaveroussy.fr.
(2)Laboratoire de Biologie Tumorale, EA 3430 Université de Strasbourg, CLCC Paul 
Strauss, Strasbourg, France.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions, Baltimore, MD, USA; Department of Epidemiology, Bloomberg School of
Public Health, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Human papillomavirus (HPV)-driven oropharyngeal cancers (OPCs) represent an
increasing proportion of head and neck cancers that could become, in the next few
decades, a public health problem in certain western countries. This significant
epidemiological change strongly calls for preventive measures. Prophylactic HPV
vaccination and screening programmes for early identification and treatment of
premalignant lesions are currently being used to reduce the incidence of uterine 
cervical cancer, which is the paradigm of HPV-driven malignancy. These strategies
have proven to be efficient as the incidence of cervical cancer has dramatically 
dropped since the 1960s in most countries where they are properly applied. The
success of cervical cancer prevention encourages the development of similar
approaches to prevent HPV-driven OPCs. However, a number of important limitations
impede their application to HPV-driven OPCs, and the development of innovative
and specific strategies dedicated to this disease are urgently needed. This
article provides an overview on primary, secondary and tertiary prevention of
HPV-driven OPC and discusses some directions for future research.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2017.03.021 
PMID: 28437708  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
