

1480. Auris Nasus Larynx. 2014 Feb;41(1):109-12. doi: 10.1016/j.anl.2013.05.006. Epub
2013 Jul 17.

Synchronous bilateral tonsillar carcinomas associated with human papillomavirus.

Nakahara S(1), Yasui T(2), Takenaka Y(2), Yamamoto Y(2), Yoshii T(2), Morii E(3),
Inohara H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Osaka University
Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka, Japan. Electronic address:
snakahara@ent.med.osaka-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Osaka University
Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka, Japan.
(3)Department of Pathology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, 
Osaka, Japan.

Although the incidence of human papillomavirus (HPV)-positive oropharyngeal
carcinoma is increasing, only a limited number of synchronous bilateral
HPV-positive tonsillar carcinomas have been reported to date. Here, we describe
an additional case of 61-year-old female. Pathological analysis proved squamous
cell carcinoma in biopsy specimens from bilateral tonsillar lesions and a fine
needle aspirate from an enlarged cervical node. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
and direct sequencing showed HPV-16 DNA in all of the biopsy specimens and fine
needle aspirate with completely concordant sequences. Bilateral tonsillar lesions
were immunohistochemically positive for p16. Taken together with radiological
findings, she was diagnosed to have bilateral tonsillar carcinomas (cT1N2bM0 on
the right side and cT2N0M0 on the left side). We administered concurrent
chemoradiotherapy to treat these synchronous lesions, and the restaging workup
resulted in overall complete response. No recurrent and/or metastatic disease has
been evident 20 months after the restaging. It seems reasonable to include
bilateral tonsils as a therapeutic target in the treatment of HPV-positive
unknown primary carcinoma.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anl.2013.05.006 
PMID: 23871190  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
