

1484. Laryngoscope. 2012 Jan;122(1):121-7. doi: 10.1002/lary.22133.

Infiltrating lymphocytes and human papillomavirus-16--associated oropharyngeal
cancer.

Wansom D(1), Light E, Thomas D, Worden F, Prince M, Urba S, Chepeha D, Kumar B,
Cordell K, Eisbruch A, Taylor J, Moyer J, Bradford C, D'Silva N, Carey T, McHugh 
J, Wolf G; UM Head Neck SPORE Program.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

OBJECTIVES/HYPOTHESIS: Human papillomavirus-16 (HPV-16)-associated carcinoma of
the oropharynx has a favorable prognosis. Such patients have elevated CD8+
T-lymphocyte levels that correlate with response to chemotherapy and survival.
Tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL) subpopulations were assessed in pretreatment 
biopsies from a prospective patient cohort to determine if TIL subsets differed
by HPV status, clinical factors, or patient outcome or correlated with peripheral
blood T-cell levels.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective immunological correlative study of patients entered
in a prospective Phase 2 clinical trial.
METHODS: Measured were CD8, CD4, CD68, and Treg (FoxP3) lymphocytes by
immunohistochemistry in a tissue microarray created from patients (n=46) with
advanced oropharyngeal cancer. Correlations with peripheral blood levels, HPV
status, expression of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), clinical tumor,
and patient characteristics and outcome were determined. Median follow-up was 6.6
years.
RESULTS: HPV-16-positive patients had improved survival (P=.016). Degree of
T-cell infiltration did not differ by HPV status but was significantly related to
disease-specific survival (DSS) and overall survival (OS). Even after adjusting
for HPV status, we found that CD8, FoxP3, and total T cells were significantly
associated with DSS (P=.0236, P=.0040, and P=.0197, respectively) and OS
(P=.0137, P=.0158, and P=.0115, respectively). Less T-cell infiltration (P=.0130)
and CD4 cells in particular (P=.0792) were associated with higher EGFR
expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Improved outcomes are associated with increased TILs independent of 
HPV status and suggest the local immune response may be more related to factors
such as tumor size, EGFR expression, or performance status than HPV status.
Further study of larger numbers of patients and infiltrates combined with
functional analysis of individual subsets may be necessary to detect significant 
differences in local immunity in HPV-16-related cancers.

Copyright Â© 2011 The American Laryngological, Rhinological, and Otological
Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.22133 
PMCID: PMC3337032
PMID: 22183632  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
