

1492. Cancer. 2016 Aug 1;122(15):2313-23. doi: 10.1002/cncr.29992. Epub 2016 May 6.

The potential impact of prophylactic human papillomavirus vaccination on
oropharyngeal cancer.

Guo T(1), Eisele DW(1), Fakhry C(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins
Medical Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland.

The incidence of oropharyngeal cancer (OPC) is significantly increasing in the
United States. Given that these epidemiologic trends are driven by human
papillomavirus (HPV), the potential impact of prophylactic HPV vaccines on the
prevention of OPC is of interest. The primary evidence supporting the approval of
current prophylactic HPV vaccines is from large phase 3 clinical trials focused
on the prevention of genital disease (cervical and anal cancer, as well as
genital warts). These trials reported vaccine efficacy rates of 89% to 98% for
the prevention of both premalignant lesions and persistent genital infections.
However, these trials were designed before the etiologic relationship between HPV
and OPC was established. There are differences in the epidemiology of oral and
genital HPV infection, such as differences in age and sex distributions, which
suggest that the vaccine efficacy observed in genital cancers may not be directly
translatable to the cancers of the oropharynx. Evaluation of vaccine efficacy is 
challenging in the oropharynx because no premalignant lesion analogous to
cervical intraepithelial neoplasia in cervical cancer has yet been identified. To
truly investigate the efficacy of these vaccines in the oropharynx, additional
clinical trials with feasible endpoints are needed. Cancer 2016;122:2313-2323. © 
2016 American Cancer Society.

© 2016 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29992 
PMCID: PMC4956510
PMID: 27152637  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
