

15. Oral Oncol. 2015 Aug;51(8):727-30. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2015.03.015. Epub 
2015 Jun 9.

Increase in head and neck cancer in younger patients due to human papillomavirus 
(HPV).

Young D(1), Xiao CC(1), Murphy B(1), Moore M(2), Fakhry C(3), Day TA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Medical University of
South Carolina, 135 Rutledge Avenue, MSC 550, Charleston, SC 29425, United
States.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Indiana University School 
of Medicine, 1120 W. Michigan Street Suite 200, Indianapolis, IN, United States.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions, 601 North Caroline Street, Baltimore, MD, United States.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Medical University of
South Carolina, 135 Rutledge Avenue, MSC 550, Charleston, SC 29425, United
States. Electronic address: dayt@musc.edu.

The face of head and neck cancer has changed dramatically over the past 30 years.
There has been a steady decline in the number of tobacco and alcohol related
squamous cell carcinomas over the past 30 years, but and increasing incidence of 
human papillomavirus (HPV) related cancers. Some estimates suggest that 70-90% of
new oropharyngeal cancers have evidence of HPV. These patients have different
demographic patterns, in that they are more likely to be younger, white adults in
their 40s and 50s who are never smokers or have reduced tobacco exposure. Studies
have shown that a higher number of lifetime oral sex partners (>5) and a higher
number of lifetime vaginal sex partners (>25) have been associated with increased
risk of HPV positive head and neck cancer. People can also reduce their risk of
HPV linked head and neck cancer by receiving the HPV vaccine series prior to
becoming sexually active. Recent evidence suggests HPV related head and neck
cancers present with different symptoms than those caused by tobacco. The most
popular test for HPV status is the p16 immunohistochemical stain because it is
cheap, simple, and studies have shown it to have comparable sensitivity and
specificity to the previous standards. It is widely recommended that all cancers 
of the oropharynx be tested for the presence of HPV, and some recommend it for
all head and neck cancers. Overall 2-year and 5-year survival for HPV positive
head and neck cancer is significantly greater than for HPV negative cancers,
likely due to HPV positive cancers being more responsive to treatment.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2015.03.015 
PMID: 26066977  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
