

150. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Nov 15;15(22):6758-62. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-0784. 
Epub 2009 Oct 27.

Human papillomavirus in head and neck cancer: its role in pathogenesis and
clinical implications.

Chung CH(1), Gillison ML.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232-6307. USA. Christine.Chung@Vanderbilt.edu

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most common cancer
with an annual incidence of approximately 400,000 worldwide. Although the
principal risk factors for head and neck cancer remain tobacco and alcohol use,
human papillomavirus (HPV) has recently been found to be etiologically associated
with 20 to 25% of HNSCC, mostly in the oropharynx. HPV causes human cancers by
expressing two viral oncoproteins, E6 and E7. These oncoproteins degrade and
destabilize two major tumor suppressor proteins, p53 and pRb, through
ubiquitination. Additional studies have shown that E6 and E7 can directly bind to
multiple host proteins other than p53 and pRb (e.g., Bak and p21(Cip1)), further 
contributing to genetic instability. However, expression of E6 and E7 alone is
not sufficient for cellular transformation, and the additional genetic
alterations necessary for malignant progression in the setting of virus-induced
genomic instability are unknown. In addition to the etiological differences,
HPV-positive cancers are clinically distinct when compared with HPV-negative
cancers with regard to treatment response and survival outcome, with tumor
HPV-positivity being a favorable prognostic biomarker. Further understanding of
carcinogenesis and clinical behavior of HPV-positive cancers will improve disease
prevention, patient care, and surveillance strategies for HNSCC patients.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-0784 
PMID: 19861444  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
