

1501. Cancer. 2013 Jul 1;119(13):2419-26. doi: 10.1002/cncr.27993. Epub 2013 Apr 10.

Modifiable risk behaviors in patients with head and neck cancer.

Sivasithamparam J(1), Visk CA, Cohen EE, King AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neuroscience, University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

BACKGROUND: Use of tobacco products, excessive alcohol consumption, and high-risk
sexual behaviors increase the risk of developing head and neck cancer and impacts
treatment effectiveness after diagnosis. This study examined smoking and
engagement in other modifiable behavioral risk factors and human papillomavirus
(HPV) status in patients with head and neck cancer in order to facilitate
identification and foster development of targeted interventions in high-risk
patients.
METHODS: Participants were 102 patients with head and neck cancer at a large
urban cancer center who completed a self-report background and health
questionnaire and provided a saliva sample for determination of the long-acting
nicotine metabolite cotinine.
RESULTS: Compared with former and never-smokers, current smokers were less
educated, less likely to be married or living with a partner, and consumed more
alcohol. Cotinine analysis indicated that 4 of 16 (25%) patients who denied
past-month cigarette use misrepresented their true smoking status. Of patients
with oropharyngeal cancer, 74% were confirmed as HPV-positive, and compared with 
HPV-negative patients, they were younger, more likely to be married/partnered and
of Caucasian race, and reported more past vaginal and oral sexual partners. Only 
one-third of HPV-positive patients were aware of their HPV disease status.
CONCLUSIONS: Cigarette smoking is associated with engagement in other modifiable 
risk factors in patients with head and neck cancer. Self-report measures of
smoking may not accurately depict true smoking status. HPV-positive cancer
patients were more likely to endorse a history of multiple sexual partners.
Regular screening and targeted interventions for these distinct risk factors are 
warranted.

Copyright Â© 2013 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.27993 
PMCID: PMC3687000
PMID: 23575663  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
