

1504. Oncotarget. 2016 May 10;7(19):27764-77. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8526.

A combinational therapy of EGFR-CAR NK cells and oncolytic herpes simplex virus 1
for breast cancer brain metastases.

Chen X(1)(2), Han J(3), Chu J(3)(4), Zhang L(3), Zhang J(5), Chen C(3), Chen
L(3), Wang Y(3), Wang H(3), Yi L(3), Elder JB(3)(6), Wang QE(7), He X(8), Kaur
B(3)(6), Chiocca EA(9), Yu J(1)(3)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, 
The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.
(2)Lymphoma/Head and Neck Oncology Department, 307 Hospital, Beijing 100071,
China.
(3)The Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, Ohio 43210,
USA.
(4)Institute of Blood and Marrow Transplantation, Soochow University, Suzhou
215000, China.
(5)Center for Biostatistics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210,
USA.
(6)Department of Neurological Surgery, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 
43210, USA.
(7)Department of Radiology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.
(8)Department of Biomedical Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus,
Ohio 43210, USA.
(9)Department of Neurosurgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvey Cushing
Neuro-oncology Laboratories, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115,
USA.
(10)The James Cancer Hospital, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Breast cancer brain metastases (BCBMs) are common in patients with metastatic
breast cancer and indicate a poor prognosis. These tumors are especially
resistant to currently available treatments due to multiple factors. However, the
combination of chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-modified immune cells and
oncolytic herpes simplex virus (oHSV) has not yet been explored in this context. 
In this study, NK-92 cells and primary NK cells were engineered to express the
second generation of EGFR-CAR. The efficacies of anti-BCBMs of EGFR-CAR NK cells,
oHSV-1, and their combination were tested in vitro and in a breast cancer
intracranial mouse model. In vitro, compared with mock-transduced NK-92 cells or 
primary NK cells, EGFR-CAR-engineered NK-92 cells and primary NK cells displayed 
enhanced cytotoxicity and IFN-Î³ production when co-cultured with breast cancer
cell lines MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468, and MCF-7. oHSV-1 alone was also capable of
lysing and destroying these cells. However, a higher cytolytic effect of EGFR-CAR
NK-92 cells was observed when combined with oHSV-1 compared to the monotherapies.
In the mice intracranially pre-inoculated with EGFR-expressing MDA-MB-231 cells, 
intratumoral administration of either EGFR-CAR-transduced NK-92 cells or oHSV-1
mitigated tumor growth. Notably, the combination of EGFR-CAR NK-92 cells with
oHSV-1 resulted in more efficient killing of MDA-MB-231 tumor cells and
significantly longer survival of tumor-bearing mice when compared to
monotherapies. These results demonstrate that regional administration of EGFR-CAR
NK-92 cells combined with oHSV-1 therapy is a potentially promising strategy to
treat BCBMs.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.8526 
PMCID: PMC5053686
PMID: 27050072  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
