

1515. Am J Epidemiol. 2015 Jan 1;181(1):40-53. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwu247. Epub 2014 Dec
4.

Risk factors for acquisition and clearance of oral human papillomavirus infection
among HIV-infected and HIV-uninfected adults.

Beachler DC, Sugar EA, Margolick JB, Weber KM, Strickler HD, Wiley DJ, Cranston
RD, Burk RD, Minkoff H, Reddy S, Xiao W, Guo Y, Gillison ML, D'Souza G.

Comment in
    Cancer Epidemiol. 2016 Aug;43:120.
    Cancer Epidemiol. 2016 Aug;43:30-4.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) causes the majority of oropharyngeal cancers in the
United States, yet the risk factors for and natural history of oral HPV infection
are largely unknown. In 2010-2011, a US-based longitudinal cohort study of 761
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected and 469 at-risk HIV-uninfected
participants from the Multicenter AIDS Cohort Study and the Women's Interagency
HIV Study was initiated. Semiannually collected oral rinses were evaluated for 37
HPV genotypes using the Roche LINEAR ARRAY HPV Genotyping Test (Roche Molecular
Systems, Pleasanton, California), and factors associated with oral HPV incidence 
and clearance were explored using adjusted Wei-Lin-Weissfeld modeling. Through
2013, the 2-year cumulative incidence of any type of oral HPV infection was 34%
in HIV-infected persons and 19% in HIV-uninfected persons. However, many of these
infections cleared. Seven percent of incident infections and 35% of prevalent
infections persisted for at least 2 years. After adjustment for other risk
factors, HIV infection (adjusted hazard ratio = 2.3, 95% confidence interval:
1.7, 3.2), reduced current CD4 cell count, and increased numbers of oral sex and 
"rimming" partners increased the risk of incident oral HPV infection, whereas
male sex, older age, and current smoking increased the risk of oral HPV
persistence (each P < 0.05). This helps explain the consistent associations
observed between these factors and prevalent oral HPV infection in previous
cross-sectional studies.

Â© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Johns
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/aje/kwu247 
PMCID: PMC4288119
PMID: 25480823  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
