

1517. Tumour Biol. 2014 May;35(5):4687-95. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-1614-9. Epub 2014
Jan 31.

Genetic imbalances detected by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification
in a cohort of patients with oral squamous cell carcinoma-the first step towards 
clinical personalized medicine.

Ribeiro IP(1), Marques F, Caramelo F, Ferrão J, Prazeres H, Julião MJ, Rifi W,
Savola S, de Melo JB, Baptista IP, Carreira IM.

Author information: 
(1)Cytogenetics and Genomics Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Coimbra, 3000-354, Coimbra, Portugal.

Oral tumors are a growing health problem worldwide; thus, it is mandatory to
establish genetic markers in order to improve diagnosis and early detection of
tumors, control relapses and, ultimately, delineate individualized therapies.
This study was the first to evaluate and discuss the clinical applicability of a 
multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) probe panel directed to
head and neck cancer. Thirty primary oral squamous cell tumors were analyzed
using the P428 MLPA probe panel. We detected genetic imbalances in 26 patients
and observed a consistent pattern of distribution of genetic alterations in terms
of losses and gains for some chromosomes, particularly for chromosomes 3, 8, and 
11. Regarding the latter, some specific genes were highlighted due to frequent
losses of genetic material--RARB, FHIT, CSMD1, GATA4, and MTUS1--and others due
to gains--MCCC1, MYC, WISP1, PTK2, CCND1, FGF4, FADD, and CTTN. We also verified 
that the gains of MYC and WISP1 genes seem to suggest higher propensity of tumors
localized in the floor of the mouth. This study proved the value of this MLPA
probe panel for a first-tier analysis of oral tumors. The probemix was developed 
to include target regions that have been already shown to be of
diagnostic/prognostic relevance for oral tumors. Furthermore, this study
emphasized several of those specific genetic targets, suggesting its importance
to oral tumor development, to predict patients' outcomes, and also to guide the
development of novel molecular therapies.

DOI: 10.1007/s13277-014-1614-9 
PMID: 24477574  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
