

1518. Radiother Oncol. 2017 Jun;123(3):412-418. doi: 10.1016/j.radonc.2017.04.015. Epub
2017 May 13.

Inadequate target volume delineation and local-regional recurrence after
intensity-modulated radiotherapy for human papillomavirus-positive oropharynx
cancer.

Chen AM(1), Chin R(2), Beron P(2), Yoshizaki T(2), Mikaeilian AG(2), Cao M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of California, Los Angeles, David
Geffen School of Medicine, United States. Electronic address:
allenmchen@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of California, Los Angeles, David
Geffen School of Medicine, United States.

PURPOSE: To perform a spatial analysis of local-regional recurrences, in relation
to quantitative dose distribution, among patients treated by intensity-modulated 
radiotherapy (IMRT) for human papillomavirus (HPV)-positive oropharyngeal cancer.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: The records of 107 consecutive patients who presented for 
consideration of re-irradiation for local-regional recurrent disease occurring in
a previously irradiated field were reviewed. The original IMRT plans were
retrieved for those with HPV-positive disease originating from the oropharynx,
and deformable image registration was used to fuse the magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) and positron emission tomography (PET) scans obtained at recurrence to the 
pre-treatment planning computed tomography (CT) dataset. The recurrent tumor
volume (Vrecur) was subsequently identified on axial imaging, and the dose of
radiation received by Vrecur was then calculated and analyzed using dose-volume
histograms.
RESULTS: A total of 83 recurrent lesions occurring in 50 oropharyngeal cancer
patients were HPV-positive and met inclusion criteria. Using PET-defined Vrecur, 
thirty-three lesions were classified as in-field recurrences (40%), 35 were
marginal misses (41%), and 15 were true misses (18%). Using the MRI-defined
Vrecur, thirty-seven lesions were classified as in-field recurrences (45%), 32
were marginal misses (39%), and 14 were true misses (17%).
CONCLUSION: A significant proportion of local-regional recurrences from
HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer represented geographical misses which possibly 
could have been prevented with more meticulous attention to IMRT planning. This
finding has important implications with respect to ongoing attempts to
de-escalate radiation dose for this disease. Our data highlight the importance of
robust quality assurance with careful review of target volumes prior to the
initiation of IMRT.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.radonc.2017.04.015 
PMID: 28511960  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
