

152. B-ENT. 2016;12(4):263-269.

Human papilloma virus detection in oropharyngeal cancer with gargle samples.

Imai T, Sato I, Matsumoto K, Asada Y, Kato K, Sogai S, Watanabe K, Sadayasu R,
Saijo S, Matsuura K.

Human papilloma virus detection in oropharyngeal cancer with gargle
samples.OBJECTIVE: human papilloma virus (HPV) is a major risk factor for
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) and knowledge of a patient's HPV
status is clinically important in terms of treatment and prognosis. The
practicality of using oral gargle samples to reliably detect HPV in patients with
OPSCC remains unclear. Therefore, we evaluated the feasibility of HPV detection
in gargle samples of OPSCC patients using an HPV-dedicated nucleic acid
amplification test (cobas 4800 HPV Test; Roche Diagnostics K.K.).
METHODOLOGY: 15 patients with histologically proven OPSCC were evaluated from May
2014 to March 2015. Swab sam- ples served as positive controls and were tested
using both the Hybrid Capture II HPV Test (HC-II; Digene Corporation) and the
cobas 4800 HPV Test. Oral gargle samples were tested using the cobas 4800 HPV
Test. Five of the 15 patients were confirmed to be HPV-positive by a combination 
of p16 immunohistochemistry, HPV-DNA in situ hybridization and nucleic acid
amplification.
RESULTS: the sensitivity and specificity of the gargling method were 60% and
100%, respectively. No false-positives were obtained. Detection of HPV in two
very small tumours rising from the base of the tongue was difficult and these
cases were overlooked as HPV-negative.
CONCLUSIONS: use of the gargling method to determine HPV positivity in OPSCC
patients appears feasible, except in patients with very small tumours. Real-time 
polymerase chain reaction using gargle samples may have greater clinical efficacy
than the swabbing method.


PMID: 29709129  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
