

1521. Carcinogenesis. 2009 Jun;30(6):977-81. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgp076. Epub 2009 Apr 
3.

Genetic variation in the vitamin C transporter, SLC23A2, modifies the risk of
HPV16-associated head and neck cancer.

Chen AA(1), Marsit CJ, Christensen BC, Houseman EA, McClean MD, Smith JF, Bryan
JT, Posner MR, Nelson HH, Kelsey KT.

Author information: 
(1)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) type 16 infection is an etiologic factor in a subset
of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC). It is unknown if host genetic 
susceptibility modifies the HPV16-HNSCC association. DNA samples collected as
part of a Boston area case-control study of HNSCC were genotyped for
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from the National Cancer Institute's
SNP500Cancer database. Analysis of demographic, phenotypic and genotypic data for
319 HNSCC cases and 495 frequency-matched controls was performed using
unconditional logistic regression. All reported P-values are two sided. We
identified a polymorphism in the sodium-dependent vitamin C transporter SLC23A2
that modifies the risk of HNSCC associated with HPV16 infection. Among those with
a wild-type allele at SLC23A2, the risk of HNSCC associated with HPV16-positive
serology was 5.0 (95% confidence interval (CI) = 3.2-7.8). However, among those
with a homozygous variant genotype, the risk of HNSCC associated with HPV16 was
attenuated [odds ratio (OR) = 2.8; 95% CI = 1.2-6.2]. Further, when we tested
whether genotype modified the interaction between citrus exposure, HPV16, and
HNSCC, we found a dramatically increased risk of HNSCC for those with a wild-type
SLC23A2 allele, HPV16-positive serology and high citrus intake (OR = 7.4; 95% CI 
= 3.6-15.1). These results suggest that SLC23A2 genetic variation alters
HPV16-associated HNSCC while also highlighting the important role of citrus
exposure in this disease.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/bgp076 
PMCID: PMC2691140
PMID: 19346260  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
