

1524. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2015 Jan 2;63(51):1228.

Aseptic meningitis outbreak associated with echovirus 30 among high school
football players--Los Angeles County, California, 2014.

Croker C, Civen R, Keough K, Ngo V, Marutani A, Schwartz B; Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC).

On August 4, 2014, the Acute Communicable Disease Control Program of the Los
Angeles County Department of Public Health received a report of three aseptic
meningitis cases among football players at a county high school. An investigation
was conducted to determine the extent of the outbreak, identify potential
exposures, and recommend control measures. An outbreak-associated aseptic
meningitis case was defined as an illness of any team or family member with onset
during July 28-August 11 with 1) cerebrospinal fluid pleocytosis and negative
bacterial culture or 2) an emergency department visit with headache, fever, and
stiff neck. Ten cases were identified; nine in males, and one in a female;
patient ages ranged from 13 to 17 years. All the patients sought care at an
emergency department, and five were hospitalized, resulting in 12 total hospital 
days. All 10 patients have recovered. Eight patients were football players, and
two were siblings of football players. The most affected subgroup was the junior 
varsity football team, with seven cases out of 57 players (attack rate = 12.3%); 
the relative risk for aseptic meningitis was higher among players who were
linemen than among those who were not linemen (relative risk = 5.4 [p = 0.03]).
Of the 10 patients, eight tested positive by polymerase chain reaction for
enterovirus, and two were not tested. Echovirus testing was performed at the
California Viral and Rickettsial Disease Laboratory. Of the eight specimens
testing positive for enterovirus, seven tested positive for echovirus 30, and one
specimen could not be typed because of insufficient quantity.


PMID: 25551596  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
