

1527. Int J Cancer. 2015 Mar 1;136(5):E207-18. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29112. Epub 2014 Aug
14.

Viral load, gene expression and mapping of viral integration sites in
HPV16-associated HNSCC cell lines.

Olthof NC(1), Huebbers CU, Kolligs J, Henfling M, Ramaekers FC, Cornet I, van
Lent-Albrechts JA, Stegmann AP, Silling S, Wieland U, Carey TE, Walline HM,
Gollin SM, Hoffmann TK, de Winter J, Kremer B, Klussmann JP, Speel EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, GROW-School for
Oncology and Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical Centre, The
Netherlands; Department of Molecular Cell Biology, GROW-School for Oncology and
Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical Centre, The Netherlands.

HPV-related HNSCC generally have a better prognosis than HPV-negative HNSCC.
However, a subgroup of HPV-positive tumors with poor prognosis has been
recognized, particularly related to smoking, EGFR overexpression and chromosomal 
instability. Viral integration into the host genome might contribute to
carcinogenesis, as is shown for cervical carcinomas. Therefore, all
HPV16-positive HNSCC cell lines currently available have been carefully analyzed 
for viral and host genome parameters. The viral integration status, viral load,
viral gene expression and the presence of aneusomies was evaluated in the cell
lines UD-SCC-2, UM-SCC-047, UM-SCC-104, UPCI:SCC090, UPCI:SCC152, UPCI:SCC154 and
93VU147T. HPV integration was examined using FISH, APOT-PCR and DIPS-PCR. Viral
load and the expression of the viral genes E2, E6 and E7 were determined via
quantitative PCR. All cell lines showed integration-specific staining patterns
and signals indicating transcriptional activity using FISH. APOT- and DIPS-PCR
identified integration-derived fusion products in six cell lines and only
episomal products for UM-SCC-104. Despite the observed differences in viral load 
and the number of viral integration sites, this did not relate to the identified 
viral oncogene expression. Furthermore, cell lines exhibited EGFR expression and 
aneusomy (except UPCI:SCC154). In conclusion, all HPV16-positive HNSCC cell lines
showed integrated and/or episomal viral DNA that is transcriptionally active,
although viral oncogene expression was independent of viral copy number and the
number of viral integration sites. Because these cell lines also contain EGFR
expression and aneusomy, which are parameters of poor prognosis, they should be
considered suitable model systems for the development of new antiviral therapies.

Â© 2014 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.29112 
PMCID: PMC5370555
PMID: 25082736  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
