

1529. Int J Cancer. 2012 Jul 15;131(2):E74-85. doi: 10.1002/ijc.26497. Epub 2011 Nov
19.

Systemic and local human papillomavirus 16-specific T-cell immunity in patients
with head and neck cancer.

Heusinkveld M(1), Goedemans R, Briet RJ, Gelderblom H, Nortier JW, Gorter A, Smit
VT, Langeveld AP, Jansen JC, van der Burg SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Oncology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

Squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck (HNSCC), in particular those of the
oropharynx, can be caused by human papilloma virus Type 16 (HPV16). Whereas these
HPV-induced oropharyngeal carcinomas may express the HPV16 E6 and E7 oncoproteins
and are associated with better survival, the nonvirally induced HNSCC are
associated with overexpression of p53. In this study we assessed the presence of 
systemic and local T cells reactive against these oncoproteins in HNSCC. An
exploratory study on the presence, type and function of HPV16- and/or
p53-specific T cells in the blood, tumor and/or metastatic lymph node as measured
by several immune assays was performed in an unselected group of 50 patients with
HNSCC. Tumor tissue was tested for HPV DNA and the overexpression of p53 protein.
Almost all HPV16+ tumors were located in the oropharynx. Circulating HPV16- and
p53-specific T cells were found in 17/47 and 7/45 tested patients. T cells were
isolated from tumor cultures and/or lymph nodes of 20 patients. HPV16-specific T 
cells were detected in six of eight HPV+ tumors, but in none of the 12
HPV-tumors. Tumor-infiltrating p53-specific T cells were not detected. In depth
analysis of the HPV16-specific T-cell response revealed that this response
comprised a broad repertoire of CD4+ T-helper Type 1 and 2 cells, CD4+ regulatory
T cells and CD8+ T cells reactive to HPV16. The local presence of HPV16-specific 
T-cell immunity in HPV16-induced HNSCC implicates a role in the antitumor
response and support the development of immunotherapy for HNSCC.

Copyright Â© 2011 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.26497 
PMID: 22020783  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
