

1534. Oncol Rep. 2013 Jul;30(1):371-6. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2415. Epub 2013 Apr 22.

Human papillomavirus predicts the outcome following concomitant chemoradiotherapy
in patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinomas.

Duray A(1), Descamps G, Decaestecker C, Sirtaine N, Gilles A, Khalif√© M,
Chantrain G, Depuydt CE, Delvenne P, Saussez S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, University of Mons,
Mons, Belgium.

We investigated the prevalence of human papillomavirus (HPV) in a clinical series
of 72 patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) using a
retrospective and prospective study design. The majority of patients were smokers
and/or drinkers and were treated with concomitant chemoradiotherapy (CCR).
Furthermore, we assessed the impact of HPV positivity on the response to CCR.
Paraffin-embedded samples from HNSCC patients (n=72) were evaluated for the
presence of HPV DNA using both GP5+/GP6+ consensus PCR and type-specific E6/E7
PCR to detect HPV types 6, 11, 16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 53, 56, 58,
59, 66, 67 and 68. The type-specific E6/E7 PCR demonstrated that 20 out of 69
HNSCC patients (29%) presented with high-risk (HR) HPV types and that 5 of the 69
HNSCC patients (7%) presented with low-risk (LR) HPV types. Using the GP5+/GP6+
PCR, we observed that the rate of response was statistically lower in the HPV+
group (P=0.02). Concerning patient outcomes in terms of recurrence and survival, 
we observed that the prognosis was poorer for HPV+ patients. We showed for the
first time that patients with HPV+ HNSCC present with a worse prognosis after
CCR. This observation highlights the need for prospective studies with large
numbers of patients and a detailed history of tobacco and alcohol consumption
before validating HPV as a marker of prognosis following CCR.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2013.2415 
PMID: 23603900  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
