

154. Oral Oncol. 2016 Dec;63:61-65. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2016.11.003. Epub 2016
Nov 16.

The association between human papillomavirus and oropharyngeal squamous cell
Carcinoma: Reviewed according to the Bradford Hill criteria for causality.

Walvik L(1), Svensson AB(2), Friborg J(3), Lajer CB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery and Audiology,
Rigshospitalet, Blegdamsvej 9, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark. Electronic address:
lena@walvik.no.
(2)Emergency Department, Ystad Hospital, Kristianstadsvaegen 3, 271 33 Ystad,
Sweden. Electronic address: amanda.bjork.svensson@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Oncology, Section 5073, Finsencentret Rigshospitalet,
Blegdamsvej 9, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark. Electronic address:
jeppe.friborg@regionh.dk.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery and Audiology,
Rigshospitalet, Blegdamsvej 9, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark. Electronic address:
Christel.Lajer@regionh.dk.

There is emerging evidence of the association between human papillomavirus and a 
subset of head and neck cancers. However, the role of human papillomavirus as a
causal factor is still debated. This review addresses the association between
human papillomavirus and oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma using the Bradford
Hill criteria. The strength of the association is supported by, detection of
human papillomavirus infection and antibodies prior to oropharyngeal squamous
cell carcinoma. This is furthermore reinforced by the absence of human
papillomavirus DNA in healthy tonsils. The association is geographically
consistent throughout the economically developed world. The presence and
integration of high-risk human papillomavirus genome in tonsillar tumours, and
expression of viral oncogenes, are specific and plausible. Analogous to human
papillomavirus in cervical cancer, the rising incidence in human papillomavirus
positive oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma is associated with sexual
behaviour. These associations have been repeatedly observed and are in accordance
with our current knowledge. The time relation between cause and effect remains
the main challenge, due to the lack of well-defined premalignant lesions.
However, a causal relationship between human papillomavirus infection and
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma seems evident.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2016.11.003 
PMID: 27939001  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
