

1542. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2009 Jul 1;74(3):928-33. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.03.004.

Radiation response in two HPV-infected head-and-neck cancer cell lines in
comparison to a non-HPV-infected cell line and relationship to signaling through 
AKT.

Gupta AK(1), Lee JH, Wilke WW, Quon H, Smith G, Maity A, Buatti JM, Spitz DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics,
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA. anjali-gupta@uiowa.edu

Comment in
    Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2011 Feb 1;79(2):635; author reply 635-6.

PURPOSE: Human papilloma virus (HPV)-associated cancers of the head and neck
(H&N) are increasing in frequency and are often treated with radiation. There are
conflicting data in the literature regarding the radiation response in the
presence of HPV infection, with some data suggesting they may be more sensitive
to radiation. There are few studies looking at in vitro effects of HPV and
further sensitization by inhibitors of specific signaling pathways. We are in the
process of starting a clinical trial in H&N cancer patients using nelfinavir
(NFV) (which inhibits Akt) and it would be important to know the effect of HPV on
radiation response +/- NFV.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Two naturally infected HPV-16 cell lines (UPCI-SCC90 and
UMSCC47) and the HPV-negative SQ20B H&N squamous carcinoma cells were used.
Western blots with or without 10 uM NFV were done to evaluate signaling from the 
PI3K-Akt pathway. Clonogenic assays were done in the three cell lines with or
without NFV.
RESULTS: Both UPCI-SCC90 and UMSCC47 cells were sensitive to radiation as
compared with SQ20B and the degree corresponded to Akt activation. The SQ20B cell
line has an activating mutation in EGFR resulting in phosphorylation (P) of Akt; 
UMSCC47 has decreased P-phosphatase and TENsin (PTEN), resulting in increased
P-Akt; UPCI-SCC90 had overexpression of P-PTEN and decreased P-Akt. NFV resulted 
in downregulation of Akt in all three cell lines, resulting in sensitization to
radiation.
CONCLUSIONS: HPV-infected H&N cancers are sensitive to radiation. The degree of
sensitivity correlates to Akt activation and they can be further sensitized by
NFV.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.03.004 
PMCID: PMC2766796
PMID: 19480971  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
