

1550. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2014 May;140(5):441-7.

Initial symptoms in patients with HPV-positive and HPV-negative oropharyngeal
cancer.

McIlwain WR, Sood AJ, Nguyen SA, Day TA.

IMPORTANCE This study addresses the most common initial symptoms of oropharyngeal
squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) and investigates differences between human
papillomavirus (HPV)â€“positive vs HPV-negative tumors. OBJECTIVES To analyze the
most common initial symptoms in patients with OPSCC and to determine if any
differences in initial symptoms occur between HPV-positive and HPV-negative
tumors. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PATIENTS Retrospective single-institution review of 
medical records of previously untreated patients with OPSCC diagnosed from
January 1, 2008, toMay 20, 2013, who were evaluated by 1 physician (the senior
author, T.A.D.) at the Medical University of South Carolina. MAIN OUTCOMES AND
MEASURES We determined the most common initial symptoms of OPSCC and analyzed
differences between HPV-positive and HPV-negative tumors. RESULTS Neck mass (in
39 patients [44%]) and sore throat (in 29 patients [33%]) comprised the most
common initial symptoms in OPSCC. Patients who were HPV-positive were more likely
to initially notice a neck mass than HPV-negative patients (51% vs 18%; P = .02),
whereas HPV-negative patients were more likely to notice sore throat (53%vs 28%; 
P = .09), dysphagia (41% vs 10%; P = .05), or odynophagia (24%vs 6%; P = .04).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE This study provides preliminary evidence supporting
neck mass and sore throat as the initial symptoms of patients with OPSCC.
Patients who were HPV-positive more commonly complained of a neck mass as the
initial symptom, whereas HPV-negative patients more commonly had symptoms related
to the primary tumor site, including sore throat, dysphagia, and/or odynophagia.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaoto.2014.141 
PMID: 24652023  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
