

1556. J Innate Immun. 2010;2(3):267-79. doi: 10.1159/000272313. Epub 2009 Dec 24.

Enhancement of antiviral activity of collectin trimers through cross-linking and 
mutagenesis of the carbohydrate recognition domain.

White MR(1), Boland P, Tecle T, Gantz D, Sorenson G, Tornoe I, Holmskov U,
McDonald B, Crouch EC, Hartshorn KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA
02118, USA.

Surfactant protein D (SP-D) plays important roles in innate defense against
respiratory viruses [including influenza A viruses (IAVs)]. Truncated trimers
composed of its neck and carbohydrate recognition domains (NCRDs) bind various
ligands; however, they have minimal inhibitory activity for IAV. We have sought
to find ways to increase the antiviral activity of collectin NCRDs. Cross-linking
of the SP-D NCRD with nonblocking monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) markedly
potentiates antiviral activity. In the present report, we demonstrate that
F(ab')2 [but not F(ab')1] fragments of a cross-linking mAb have similar effects. 
Hence, cross-linking activity, but not the Fc domain of the mAb, is needed for
increased antiviral activity. In contrast, the Fc domain of the mAb was important
for increasing viral uptake or respiratory burst responses of human neutrophils. 
Our NCRD constructs contain an S protein binding site. Herein, we show that a
multivalent S protein complex caused cross-linking and also increased the
antiviral activity of NCRDs. NCRDs of conglutinin and CL43 had greater intrinsic 
antiviral activity than those of SP-D or mannose-binding lectin. Based on motifs 
found in these serum collectins, we have constructed mutant versions of the human
SP-D NCRD that have increased antiviral activity. These mutant NCRDs also had
potentiated activity after cross-linking with F(ab')2 fragments or S protein
complexes. Hence, the antiviral activity of NCRDs can be increased by 2 distinct,
complementary strategies, namely cross-linking of NCRDs through various means and
mutagenesis of CRD residues to increase viral binding. These findings may be
relevant for antiviral therapy.

(c) 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000272313 
PMCID: PMC2956016
PMID: 20375547  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
