

1557. Int J Oncol. 2014 Jul;45(1):67-76. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2440. Epub 2014 May 12.

A comprehensive evaluation of human papillomavirus positive status and p16INK4a
overexpression as a prognostic biomarker in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma.

Deng Z(1), Hasegawa M(1), Aoki K(2), Matayoshi S(1), Kiyuna A(1), Yamashita Y(1),
Uehara T(1), Agena S(1), Maeda H(1), Xie M(3), Suzuki M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Graduate School of
Medicine, University of the Ryukyus, Okinawa, Japan.
(2)Department of Public Health and Hygiene, Graduate School of Medicine,
University of the Ryukyus, Okinawa, Japan.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Zhujiang Hospital,
Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, P.R. China.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) patients with human papillomavirus 
(HPV) infection have better prognosis than those without HPV infection. Although 
p16(INK4a) expression is used as a surrogate marker for HPV infection, there is
controversy as to whether p16(INK4a) reliably indicates HPV infection. Here, to
evaluate the accuracy of p16(INK4a) expression for determining HPV infection and 
the prognostic value of HPV infection and p16(INK4a) expression for HNSCC
survival, especially oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) survival, 150 
fresh-frozen HNSCC samples were analyzed for HPV DNA, E6/E7 mRNA and p16(INK4a)
expression by polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry. p16(INK4a)
expression was scored from 0 to 4 according to the percentage of
p16(INK4a)-positive cells, with overexpression defined as >40% positive cells. Of
the 150 tumor samples tested, 10 tumors were nasopharyngeal, 53 oropharyngeal, 39
hypopharyngeal, 24 laryngeal and 24 were located in the oral cavity. HPV DNA was 
detected in 47 (31.3%) samples, but only 21 also exhibited HPV mRNA expression.
Inter-rater agreement was low between p16(INK4a) expression and HPV DNA presence 
and between p16(INK4a) expression and HPV mRNA expression, but was good between
the combination of HPV DNA status and p16(INK4a) overexpression and HPV mRNA
expression. Three-year recurrence-free survival was significantly higher for
OPSCC patients who were HPV DNA-positive than for OPSCC patients who were HPV
DNA-negative (P=0.008) and for OPSCC patients overexpressing p16(INK4a) than for 
without overexpressing p16(INK4a) (P=0.034). Multivariate analysis revealed that 
T1-3 stage and the combination of HPV DNA positivity and p16(INK4a)
overexpression predicted significantly better recurrence-free survival. This
combination is a more accurate marker for active HPV infection in HNSCC than HPV 
DNA status or general p16(INK4a)-positive status alone and offers a useful and
reliable method for detecting and determining the prognosis of HPV-related HNSCC.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2440 
PMCID: PMC4079160
PMID: 24820457  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
