

1558. Int J Oncol. 2014 Jun;44(6):1799-805. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2355. Epub 2014 Mar
21.

Human papillomavirus and oropharyngeal cancer, the epidemics, and significance of
additional clinical biomarkers for prediction of response to therapy (Review).

Dalianis T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Cancer Center
Karolinska, Karolinska University Hospital, 171 76 Stockholm, Sweden.

In 2007, the International Agency for Research against Cancer (IARC) recognized
human papillomavirus (HPV), especially HPV16, besides smoking and alcohol, as a
risk factor for oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC), where tonsillar
and base of tongue cancer dominate. Moreover, during the past decade, in many
Western countries, a sharp rise in the incidence of OPSCC, more specifically of
HPV-positive OPSCC has been observed. Notably, patients with HPV-positive OPSCC, 
where the majority are men, particularly never-smokers have a better clinical
outcome than patients with HPV-negative OPSCC and other head neck cancer (roughly
80 vs. 40% disease-free survival with conventional radiotherapy and surgery).
This suggests that many patients with HPV-positive OPSCC may not require the more
aggressive intensified chemo-radiotherapy given to head neck cancer patients
today, and could with somewhat tapered treatment maintain excellent survival,
avoiding some of the severe side effects along with intensified treatment.
However, before de-intensified treatment is administered additional biomarkers
are necessary in combination with HPV-positive status in order to predict and
select patients that will respond favorably to therapy. In conclusion, noteworthy
issues within this field with an increasing cohort of patients with HPV-positive 
OPSCC are better-tailored therapy and prevention. Patients with HPV-positive
OPSCC, with biomarkers for good response to therapy e.g., low MHC classÂ I, or
CD44 expression or high numbers of CD8+ tumor infiltrating lymphocytes, could be 
included in randomized trials with less severe therapy. Furthermore,
possibilities to screen for HPV-positive OPSCC and to vaccinate boys against HPV 
infection should be further investigated.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2355 
PMCID: PMC4063535
PMID: 24676623  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
