

1559. J Immunother. 2016 Oct;39(8):316-20. doi: 10.1097/CJI.0000000000000137.

Vaccination Against Human Papilloma Viruses Leads to a Favorable Cytokine Profile
of Specific T Cells.

Luckau S(1), Wehrs TP, Brandau S, Horn PA, Lindemann M.

Author information: 
(1)*Institute for Transfusion Medicine †Department of Otorhinolaryngology,
University Hospital, Essen, Germany.

Several human papilloma viruses (HPV) are known to cause malignant
transformation. The high-risk type HPV 16 is associated with cervical carcinoma
and head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. HPV 16-positive tumor cells
exclusively carry the HPV 16 oncogenes E6 and E7. These oncogenes appear as
excellent targets for an adoptive immunotherapy. We here addressed the question
whether specific T cells from HPV-vaccinated healthy volunteers could be
especially suitable for an HPV-specific cellular immunotherapy. Of note, vaccines
contain HPV 16. To quantify HPV 16 E6-specific and E7-specific cells,
enzyme-linked immunospot assays to measure interferon-γ (IFN-γ) and
interleukin-10 (Th1-Th2 balance) and the secretion of the cytotoxic molecules
granzyme B and perforin have been optimized. The frequency of peripheral blood
mononuclear cells secreting IFN-γ and perforin was significantly (P<0.05)
increased in HPV-vaccinated versus nonvaccinated volunteers. Overall, however,
the median frequency of HPV 16-specific cells with a favorable secretion profile 
(Th1 balanced and cytotoxic) was low even in vaccinated volunteers (IFN-γ:
0.0018% and 0.0023%, perforin: 0.01% and 0.0087% for E6-specific and E7-specific 
cells, respectively). But some vaccinated volunteers showed up to 0.1%
HPV-specific, IFN-γ or perforin-secreting cells. In conclusion, our data suggest 
that vaccinated volunteers are superior to nonvaccinated donors for HPV-specific 
cellular cancer immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.1097/CJI.0000000000000137 
PMID: 27548034  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
