

1568. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2015 Oct;141(10):1845-57. doi:
10.1007/s00432-015-1969-3. Epub 2015 Apr 29.

Epstein-Barr virus-targeted therapy in nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Stoker SD(1), NovaliÄ‡ Z, Wildeman MA, Huitema AD, Verkuijlen SA, Juwana H,
Greijer AE, Tan IB, Middeldorp JM, de Boer JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery and Oncology, Netherlands Cancer
Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, s.stoker@nki.nl.

PURPOSE: Despite successful primary treatment of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC), 
the incidence of distant metastasis remains 25-34 %. Treatment options are
limited, and survival is poor. Intratumoural Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) was used as
treatment target. In NPC, EBV is present in a latent state, expressing only few
non-immunogenic viral products. Gemcitabine and valproic acid can trigger EBV to 
the lytic state, wherein viral kinases are expressed, making EBV-positive tumour 
cells susceptible for antiviral therapy with, i.e. valganciclovir, and inducing
an EBV-specific immune response.
METHODS: This drug combination was applied in eight patients with EBV-positive
NPC, refractory to conventional treatment. The primary endpoints were safety,
tolerability and clinical response. Secondary endpoint was to get proof of
concept based on biomarkers, i.e. pharmacokinetics, EBV-DNA load in whole blood
and nasopharyngeal brushes, EBV-RNA profiling for proof of lytic induction,
EBV-IgG and EBV-IgA levels and diversity and EBV-specific T cell response.
RESULTS: The best observed clinical response was partial in two patients (25 %)
and stable disease in three patients (37.5 %). The median survival was 9 months
(95 % confidence interval 7-17 months). Effective dose levels were reached.
Peaking of EBV-DNA loads in blood and brush proved the biological effect on EBV
during most treatment cycles. In one patient, RNA profiling confirmed lytic EBV
induction. EBV-IgG and EBV-IgA antibody levels were already high before treatment
and did not change during treatment. No changes in EBV-specific T cell response
were detected.
CONCLUSION: The treatment was safe with manageable side effects, clinical
response was observed, and viral activation corroborated.

DOI: 10.1007/s00432-015-1969-3 
PMID: 25920375  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
