

1570. Oral Oncol. 2010 Feb;46(2):100-4. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2009.11.004. Epub
2009 Dec 29.

Moderate predictive value of demographic and behavioral characteristics for a
diagnosis of HPV16-positive and HPV16-negative head and neck cancer.

D'Souza G(1), Zhang HH, D'Souza WD, Meyer RR, Gillison ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
United States.

Patients with HPV-positive and HPV-negative head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) are significantly different with regard to sociodemographic and
behavioral characteristics that clinicians may use to assume tumor HPV status.
Machine learning methods were used to evaluate the predictive value of patient
characteristics and laboratory biomarkers of HPV exposure for a diagnosis of
HPV16-positive HNSCC compared to in situ hybridization, the current
gold-standard. Models that used a combination of demographic characteristics such
as age, tobacco use, gender, and race had only moderate predictive value for
tumor HPV status among all patients with HNSCC (positive predictive value
[PPV]=75%, negative predictive value [NPV]=68%) or when limited to oropharynx
cancer patients (PPV=55%, NPV=65%) and thus included a sizeable number of false
positive and false negative predictions. Prediction was not improved by the
addition of other demographic or behavioral factors (sexual behavior, income,
education) or biomarkers of HPV16 exposure (L1, E6/7 antibodies or DNA in oral
exfoliated cells). Patient demographic and behavioral characteristics as well as 
HPV biomarkers are not an accurate substitute for clinical testing of tumor HPV
status.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2009.11.004 
PMCID: PMC2818855
PMID: 20036610  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
