

1575. J Med Virol. 2010 May;82(6):1017-23. doi: 10.1002/jmv.21749.

Association between human papillomavirus infection and laryngeal squamous cell
carcinoma.

Morshed K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Medical University of
Lublin, Lublin, Poland. kamal1@op.pl

The aim of this study was to compare the prevalence of human papillomavirus (HPV)
infection in laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma using two methods: PCR-DNA enzyme 
immunoassay (PCR/DEIA) and immunohistochemistry (IHC) for detection of HPV in
specimens of laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma and to correlate the presence of
HPV with the epidemiological and clinicopathological features of recurrence and
survival. HPV DNA was amplified from 93 paraffin-embedded laryngeal squamous cell
carcinoma tissue specimens by the short PCR fragment (SPF 10) primer set using
PCR/DNA method. HPV detection using monoclonal anti-human papilloma virus
antibodies Clone K1H8 for IHC reaction was performed on 130 specimens. HPV was
identified in 35.5% of patients with laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma using
PCR/DEIA and 27.7% using IHC. There was no statistically significant association 
between the presence of HPV and the epidemiological and clinicopathological
features and recurrence. There was no statistically significant association
between the presence of HPV and overall survival nor disease specific survival.
Statistically significant correlation between HPV detection using PCR/DEIA
technique and IHC technique was found. The presence of HPV infection in 27.7% and
38.9% of the patients suggests a possible role in the etiology of laryngeal
squamous cell carcinoma. The SPF(10) PCR/DEIA technique is the most accurate
method for detection of HPV in laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.21749 
PMID: 20419817  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
