

1579. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2010 May-Jun;44(3):477-87.

Expression and characterization of a multivalent human respiratory syncytial
virus protein.

Subbarayan P(1), Qin H, Pillai S, Lee JJ, Pfendt AP, Willing G, Miller ME, Dennis
VA, Singh SR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for NanoBiotechnology Research, Alabama State University, 915 South
Jackson Street, Montgomery, AL 36101, USA.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) has been recognized as one of the most common
causes of severe respiratory tract infection in infants worldwide. As yet, a safe
and effective vaccine has not been developed to protect humans from RSV. The F
and G surface proteins have been widely investigated due to their potential to
induce protective immunity. In addition, the M2 protein has been shown to be
important in inducing a T-cell response. Our project involved the cloning of the 
immunodominant regions of the RSV F, M2 and G proteins into a bacterial vector,
pET-32a (+). The recombinant RFM2G protein was expressed in Escherichia coli and 
purified using His Bind columns. The purified rRFM2G protein was analyzed by
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and Western blotting. The predicted structure 
of the recombinant protein built by the Swiss PDB Viewer program suggested a rod 
shape with a distinct swollen head and neck which was confirmed by transmission
electron microscopy and atomic force microscopy. BALB/c female mice were
immunized with either RSV, rRFM2G alone, or rRFM2G in combination with flagellin 
as a mucosal adjuvant. Serum was collected on days 0, 14, 28 and 49 to assess the
immune response by Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Intranasal immunization of 
mice with the rRFM2G protein yielded significantly high serum IgG titers.
Co-administration of the rRFM2G protein with flagellin did not augment the serum 
antibody response.


PMID: 20608172  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
