

1581. Cancer Sci. 2010 Feb;101(2):482-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2009.01409.x. Epub
2009 Oct 20.

Conditionally replicating adenovirus improves gene replication efficiency and
anticancer effect of E1-deleted adenovirus carrying TRAIL in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma.

Shim SH(1), Lee CT, Hun Hah J, Lee JJ, Park SW, Heo DS, Sung MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Tumor Biology, College of Medicine, Seoul National
University, Seoul, Korea.

To overcome the low efficiency of gene therapy, we combined a conditionally
replicating adenovirus (CRAd) and an adenoviral vector with a therapeutic gene.
CRAd has an oncolytic activity in cancer cells with abnormal Rb activity and
helps the replication of therapeutic genes incorporated in the E1-deleted
adenovirus. We investigated the anticancer effect of a combination of CRAd and
adenovirus carrying tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis inducing ligand
(ad-TRAIL). We expected to see increased gene expression in cancer cells as well 
as an antitumor effect. With the combined application of CRAd and ad-luciferase
in head and neck cancer cell lines, we observed considerably increased luciferase
activity that was 10- to 50-fold greater than with ad-luciferase alone. The
combination of CRAd and ad-TRAIL showed significant suppression of growth in cell
lines and increased the sub-G(1) portion of cells 30-fold compared to any single 
treatment. The expression of TRAIL was highly amplified by the combined treatment
and was accompanied by expression of molecules related to apoptosis. In a
xenograft animal model, mice treated with CRAd and ad-TRAIL showed complete
regression of established tumors, whereas mice treated with CRAd or ad-TRAIL
alone did not. In conclusion, this combined strategy using CRAd and adenovirus
carrying a therapeutic gene increased the gene transfer rate and enhanced
antitumor effects. We expect that this combination strategy could be extended to 
a multitarget cancer gene therapy by combining multiple adenoviruses and CRAd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2009.01409.x 
PMID: 19922505  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
