

1584. Am J Surg Pathol. 2014 Jul;38(7):946-55. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000206.

Epstein-Barr virus-infected cells in IgG4-related lymphadenopathy with comparison
with extranodal IgG4-related disease.

Takeuchi M(1), Sato Y, Yasui H, Ozawa H, Ohno K, Takata K, Gion Y, Orita Y,
Tachibana T, Itoh T, Asano N, Nakamura S, Swerdlow SH, Yoshino T.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology ∥Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Okayama
University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Okayama ‡Center for Antibody and Vaccine, Research Hospital, The Institute of
Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo §Department of Pathology, Okazaki
City Hospital, Okazaki ¶Department of Otolaryngology, Himeji Red Cross Hospital, 
Himeji †Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Kobe University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kobe Departments of #Clinical Laboratory **Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Nagoya University Hospital, Nagoya, Japan ††Department of Pathology,
Division of Hematopathology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA.

IgG4-related lymphadenopathy with increased numbers of Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV)-infected cells has been reported but not fully described. We analyzed 31
cases of IgG4-related lymphadenopathy and 24 cases of extranodal IgG4-related
diseases for their possible relationship with EBV. Other types of reactive lymph 
nodes (22) and angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma (AITL) (10) were also studied
for comparison. EBV-encoded RNA (EBER) in situ hybridization revealed EBER(+)
cells in 18 of 31 cases (58%) of IgG4-related lymphadenopathy. Increased EBER(+) 
cells were found in only 4 of 22 (18.1%) non-IgG4-related reactive lymphoid
hyperplasia in patients of a similar age (P=0.002) and in only 5 of 24 (21%)
extranodal IgG4-related biopsies (P=0.006). Interestingly, all patients with
EBER(+) progressively transformed germinal center-type IgG4-related
lymphadenopathy had systemic lymphadenopathy and/or extranodal involvement. AITL 
also is associated with EBV, and IgG4-related lymphadenopathy sometimes mimics
the morphology of AITL; however, the number of IgG4(+) cells in AITL was
significantly less than that in IgG4-related lymphadenopathy (P<0.001). Increased
numbers of regulatory T cells are seen in IgG4-related disease; however, there
was not a significant difference between the EBER(+) and EBER(-) cases. In
conclusion, the presence of increased numbers of EBV-infected cells in
IgG4-related lymphadenopathy, compared with other reactive lymphadenopathy or
extranodal IgG4-related disease, suggests that there may be a relationship at
least between nodal IgG4-related disease and EBV. It is important to avoid
overdiagnosing these cases as malignant lymphomas or EBV-related
lymphoproliferative disorders.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000206 
PMID: 24705309  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
