

1588. Am J Nurs. 2016 Aug;116(8):34-43. doi: 10.1097/01.NAJ.0000490170.91898.13.

CE: Human Papillomavirus-Related Oropharyngeal Cancer: A Review of Nursing
Considerations.

McKiernan J(1), Thom B.

Author information: 
(1)Janet McKiernan is an NP and Bridgette Thom is a senior research specialist in
the Survivorship Center at the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York
City. Contact author: Janet McKiernan, mckiernj@mskcc.org. The authors and
planners have disclosed no potential conflicts of interest, financial or
otherwise.

: The overall incidence of head and neck cancer-which includes laryngeal,
hypopharyngeal, nasal cavity, paranasal sinus, nasopharyngeal, oral,
oropharyngeal, and salivary gland cancers-has declined in the United States over 
the past 30 years with the concomitant reduction in tobacco use. Over that same
period, however, the worldwide incidence of oropharyngeal cancer has escalated
significantly, most notably among men and women under age 60 who live in
developed countries. This epidemic rise in oropharyngeal cancer is largely
attributed to certain genotypes of the human papillomavirus (HPV). In the United 
States, HPV prevalence in oropharyngeal tumors increased dramatically, from
roughly 16% between 1984 and 1989 to nearly 73% between 2000 and 2004, and the
annual incidence of HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer is expected to surpass that
of HPV-related cervical cancer by 2020.This article provides an overview of head 
and neck cancer-its incidence, risk factors, treatment, and posttreatment
sequelae-with a focus on HPV-related oropharyngeal cancer. Unlike other forms of 
head and neck cancer, HPV-related oropharyngeal cancer tends to affect younger
patients with few or none of the traditional risk factors and has a distinctive
presentation, histology, and natural course. In order to provide appropriate
patient education and to help these patients monitor and manage late and
long-term treatment effects, it is important for nurses to be aware of this
disease and its treatment, and of the unique survivorship issues that arise for
affected patients.

DOI: 10.1097/01.NAJ.0000490170.91898.13 
PMID: 27428508  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
