

1591. J Neurooncol. 2013 May;112(3):449-54. doi: 10.1007/s11060-013-1075-9. Epub 2013
Feb 14.

Metastatic squamous cell carcinoma to the brain: an unrecognized pattern of
distant spread in patients with HPV-related head and neck cancer.

Ruzevick J(1), Olivi A, Westra WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is notorious for local recurrence
and metastatic spread to regional lymph nodes. Distant spread is uncommon, and
brain involvement is rare. Over the past decade there has been a rising incidence
of HPV-related HNSCC, but it is not known if this escalation has had any impact
on trends relating to brain involvement. Cases of metastatic squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC) to the brain were identified from a computerized search of the
surgical pathology files of The Johns Hopkins Hospital between 1985 and 2012. The
medical records were reviewed to document primary site of tumor origin,
treatment, and patient outcome. P16 immunohistochemistry and HPV in situ
hybridization were performed on those metastases arising from the head and neck. 
Of the 38 metastatic SCCs, 7 (18 %) originated in the head and neck. HPV-16 was
detected in 4 (57 %) of the metastatic HNSCCs. All 4 HPV-positive metastases were
from oropharyngeal primaries. The time from treatment of the primary to
development of the brain metastasis ranged from 19 to 57 months (mean, 45).
Following aggressive treatment (surgery and radiation), two patients died of
disease progression (7 and 34 months), and two are alive with recurrent brain
metastases (4 and 10 months). Although HPV positivity is regarded as a favorable 
prognostic indicator, it does not safeguard from spread to the brain. In our
experience, just over half of the HNSCCs that metastasized to the brain were
HPV-related. The potential for developing a brain metastasis long after curative 
therapy argues for extended patient follow-up. The development of a brain
metastasis is an ominous finding signaling rapid clinical deterioration.

DOI: 10.1007/s11060-013-1075-9 
PMCID: PMC3630253
PMID: 23408186  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
