

1595. J Proteome Res. 2014 Feb 7;13(2):1002-11. doi: 10.1021/pr401009f. Epub 2014 Jan
10.

Regulation of interleukin-6 in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma is related
to papillomavirus infection.

Guerrera IC(1), Quetier I, Fetouchi R, Moreau F, Vauloup-Fellous C, Lekbaby B,
Rousselot C, Chhuon C, Edelman A, Lefevre M, Nicolas JC, Kremsdorf D, Lacau Saint
Guily J, Soussan P.

Author information: 
(1)Plateau Protéome Necker, IFR 94, Université Paris Descartes , Paris, France.

The prevalence of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) related to human 
papillomavirus (HPV) is increasing, unlike tobacco- and alcohol-associated
cancers. To gain a clearer understanding of the molecular mechanisms implicated
in HNSCC, depending on the presence or not of a viral sequence, we investigated
the expression of proteins detected in the tumor regions of HNSCC patients.
Twenty-two untreated HNSCC patients were selected according to the presence of
HPV-16. For six patients, tumor and controlateral healthy tissues were tested for
viral detection before quantitative proteomic analysis. After confirmation by
Western blot, proteins were connected into a network, leading to investigate
interleukin-6 (IL-6) by immunocytochemistry and ELISA. 41 ± 5% of proteins
quantified by proteomics were differentially expressed in tumor compared with
healthy regions. Among them, 36 proteins were retained as modulated in HPV-16
positive or negative tumors, including cytokeratins, tubulins, annexin A1, and
serpin B1. Network analysis suggested a central role of IL-6, confirmed by
overexpression of IL-6 in tumor tissues as in sera of HPV-negative HNSCC compared
with HPV-16-positive tumors. This modulation may contribute to the survival and
proliferation of cancer cells, although it was not related to tumor stage or to
the level of HPV-16 DNA.

DOI: 10.1021/pr401009f 
PMID: 24405156  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
