

1596. Int J Cancer. 2014 Nov 15;135(10):2404-12. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28876. Epub 2014 Apr 
17.

Combined P16 and human papillomavirus testing predicts head and neck cancer
survival.

Salazar CR(1), Anayannis N, Smith RV, Wang Y, Haigentz M Jr, Garg M, Schiff BA,
Kawachi N, Elman J, Belbin TJ, Prystowsky MB, Burk RD, Schlecht NF.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Epidemiology and Population Health, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine and Montefiore Medical Center, NY.

While its prognostic significance remains unclear, p16(INK4a) protein expression 
is increasingly being used as a surrogate marker for oncogenic human
papillomavirus (HPV) infection in head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC).
To evaluate the prognostic utility of p16 expression in HNSCC, we prospectively
collected 163 primary tumor specimens from histologically confirmed HNSCC
patients who were followed for up to 9.4 years. Formalin fixed tumor specimens
were tested for p16 protein expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC). HPV type-16
DNA and RNA was detected by MY09/11-PCR and E6/E7 RT-PCR on matched frozen
tissue, respectively. P16 protein expression was detected more often in
oropharyngeal tumors (53%) as compared with laryngeal (24%), hypopharyngeal (8%) 
or oral cavity tumors (4%; p<0.0001). With respect to prognosis, p16-positive
oropharyngeal tumors exhibited significantly better overall survival than
p16-negative tumors (log-rank test p=0.04), whereas no survival benefit was
observed for nonoropharyngeal tumors. However, when both p16 and HPV DNA test
results were considered, concordantly positive nonoropharyngeal tumors had
significantly better disease-specific survival than concordantly negative
nonoropharyngeal tumors after controlling for sex, nodal stage, tumor size, tumor
subsite, primary tumor site number, smoking and drinking [adjusted hazard ratio
(HR)=0.04, 0.01-0.54]. Compared with concordantly negative nonoropharyngeal
HNSCC, p16(+)/HPV16(-) nonoropharyngeal HNSCC (n=13, 7%) demonstrated no
significant improvement in disease-specific survival when HPV16 was detected by
RNA (adjusted HR=0.83, 0.22-3.17). Our findings show that p16 IHC alone has
potential as a prognostic test for oropharyngeal cancer survival, but combined
p16/HPV testing is necessary to identify HPV-associated nonoropharyngeal HNSCC
with better prognosis.

Â© 2014 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.28876 
PMCID: PMC4159440
PMID: 24706381  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
