

1600. Oral Dis. 2012 Jul;18(5):430-41. doi: 10.1111/j.1601-0825.2011.01892.x. Epub 2012
Jan 18.

National prevalence of oral HPV infection and related risk factors in the U.S.
adult population.

Sanders AE(1), Slade GD, Patton LL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental Ecology, School of Dentistry, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7450, USA.
anne_sanders@dentistry.unc.edu

This article reviews the rapidly growing evidence that oral human papilloma
viruses (HPV) infection contributes to the risk of oral squamous cell carcinoma. 
It also reports the first nationally representative estimates of oral HPV
prevalence in the United States adult population. An estimated 7.3% (95% CI: 6.0,
8.9) of the U.S. population had one or more oral HPV types detected in oral
rinse; 3.1% (95%CI: 2.4, 3.9) of the U.S. population had one or more oncogenic
HPV types. A substantial excess risk of HPV infection in men is not explained by 
education, smoking, age of sexual debut, or number of lifetime sex partners.
Based on the published finding from a case-control study, where there was an odds
ratio of 2.6 (95% CI: 1.5, 4.2) for the association of head and neck cancer
oncogenic oral HPV infection, the estimated population attributable risk for head
and neck cancer in the U.S. population was 4.7%. In other words, there would be a
4.7% reduction in incidence rate of head and neck cancer in the United States if 
oncogenic HPV infection could be prevented. The results also provide population
data that help evaluate the likely public health benefits of prophylactic
vaccination against oral HPV acquisition.

Â© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1601-0825.2011.01892.x 
PMID: 22251072  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
