

1606. Oncotarget. 2016 Jul 26;7(30):47302-47318. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.10100.

Cidofovir is active against human papillomavirus positive and negative head and
neck and cervical tumor cells by causing DNA damage as one of its working
mechanisms.

Mertens B(1), Nogueira T(1), Stranska R(1), Naesens L(1), Andrei G(1), Snoeck
R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Rega Institute for Medical Research, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) causes cervical cancer and a large fraction of head
and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC). Cidofovir (CDV) proved efficacious in 
the treatment of several HPV-induced benign and malignant hyper proliferations.
To provide a better insight into how CDV selectively eradicates transformed
cells, HPV+ and HPV- cervical carcinoma and HNSCC cell lines were compared to
normal cells for antiproliferative effects, CDV metabolism, drug incorporation
into cellular DNA, and DNA damage. Incorporation of CDV into cellular DNA was
higher in tumor cells than in normal cells and correlated with CDV
antiproliferative effects, which were independent of HPV status. Increase in
phospho-ATM levels was detected following CDV exposure and higher levels of
Î³-H2AX (a quantitative marker of double-strand breaks) were measured in tumor
cells compared to normal cells. A correlation between DNA damage and CDV
incorporation into DNA was found but not between DNA damage and CDV
antiproliferative effects. These data indicate that CDV antiproliferative effects
result from incorporation of the drug into DNA causing DNA damage. However, the
anti-tumor effects of CDV cannot be exclusively ascribed to DNA damage.
Furthermore, CDV can be considered a promising broad spectrum anti-cancer agent, 
not restricted to HPV+ lesions.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.10100 
PMCID: PMC5216943
PMID: 27331622  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
