
Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts
of interest.


1607. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 24;10(6):e0130935. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130935.
eCollection 2015.

Chick Chorioallantoic Membrane Assay: A 3D Animal Model for Study of Human
Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma.

Xiao X(1), Zhou X(1), Ming H(1), Zhang J(1), Huang G(1), Zhang Z(1), Li P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of
Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical
University, Nanning, China.

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a highly invasive and metastatic head and neck 
cancer. However, mechanistic study of the invasion and metastasis of NPC has been
hampered by the lack of proper in vivo models. We established an in vivo chick
embryo chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) model to study NPC tumor biology. We found 
100% micro-tumor formation 3 days after inoculation with NPC cell lines (4/4) or 
primary tumor biopsy tissue (35/35). The transplanted NPC micro-tumors grew on
CAMs with extracellular matrix interaction and induced angiogenesis. In addition,
the CAM model could be used to study the growth of transplanted NPC tumors and
also several important steps of metastasis, including tumor invasion by detecting
the extent of basement membrane penetration, tumor angiogenesis by analyzing the 
area of neo-vessels, and tumor metastasis by quantifying tumor cells in distant
organs. We established and described a feasible, easy-to-manipulate and reliable 
CAM model for in vivo study of NPC tumor biology. This model closely simulates
the clinical features of NPC growth, progression and metastasis and could help
elucidate the biological mechanisms of the growth pattern and invasion of NPC
cells and in quantitative assessment of angiogenesis and cell intravasation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130935 
PMCID: PMC4479447
PMID: 26107941  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
