

1608. Invest New Drugs. 2012 Feb;30(1):48-58. doi: 10.1007/s10637-010-9513-4. Epub 2010
Aug 7.

K252a induces anoikis-sensitization with suppression of cellular migration in
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)--associated nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells.

Ng YK(1), Wong EY, Lau CP, Chan JP, Wong SC, Chan AS, Kwan MP, Tsao SW, Tsang CM,
Lai PB, Chan AT, Lui VW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, SAR,
China.

Recent studies revealed an unexpected role of the neurotrophin receptor pathway, 
BDNF/TrkB signaling, in cancer metastasis and anoikis (i.e. detachment-induced
cell death). Survival of cancer cells in detached state (known as
anoikis-resistance) is known to be pre-requisite for metastasis. Nasopharyngeal
carcinoma (NPC), an endemic head and neck cancer in Southeast Asia, is highly
invasive, metastatic, and etiologically associated with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV, 
an oncovirus) infection. Mechanistic studies on the invasive/metastatic nature of
NPC can facilitate the development of anti-metastatic therapy in NPC. Thus far,
the role of BDNF/TrkB signaling in virus-associated human cancer is unclear.
Here, using multiple cell line models of NPC with EBV-association (HONE-1-EBV,
HK1-LMP1 and C666-1), we investigated the potential involvement of BDNF/TrkB
signaling in cellular migration and anoikis-resistant characteristics of NPC. We 
found that all three EBV-associated NPC cell lines tested were intrinsically
anoikis-resistant (i.e. survived in detached state) and expressed both BDNF and
TrkB. BDNF stimulation induced cellular migration, but not proliferation of these
cells. Further, we examined if pharmacologic targeting of anoikis-resistance of
NPC cells can be achievable by a proof-of-concept Trk inhibitor, K252a, in these 
EBV-associated NPC models. Our results demonstrated that K252a, was able to
attenuate BDNF-induced migration and proliferation of NPC cells. More
importantly, we demonstrated for the first time that K252a harbored potent
anoikis-sensitization activity (i.e. sensitizing cancer cells to
detachment-induced cell death) against EBV-associated human cancer cells, namely 
NPC cells. This proof-of-concept study demonstrated that K252a, a Trk inhibitor, 
can potentially be used as an anoikis-sensitizing agent in NPC.

DOI: 10.1007/s10637-010-9513-4 
PMID: 20694504  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
