

161. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2018 Apr;275(4):857-865. doi:
10.1007/s00405-018-4866-y. Epub 2018 Jan 11.

Strengthening the case for gender-neutral and the nonavalent HPV vaccine.

Hintze JM(1), O'Neill JP(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, 123 St. Stephen's Green, Dublin,
Ireland. hintzej@tcd.ie.
(2)Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, 123 St. Stephen's Green, Dublin,
Ireland.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin,
Ireland.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this review is to highlight the benefits of
gender-neutral and the nonavalent human papillomavirus vaccination. Human
papillomavirus infection is the most commonly sexually transmitted disease and is
known to cause several types of cancers, including cervical, vulvar, vaginal,
penile, oropharyngeal, anal, and rectal. 5% of cancers every year are
attributable to human papillomavirus infection, with cervical cancer the most
common and oropharyngeal cancer estimated to surpass the incidence of cervical
cancer by 2020.
METHODS: PubMed and MEDLINE were searched using the following search terms:
[(human papillomavirus OR HPV) AND (vaccine OR vaccination)] AND [(gardasil OR
gardasil9 OR cervarix OR quadrivalent OR nonavalent OR ninevalent) OR (gender
neutral OR male)].
RESULTS: There are currently three different types of human papillomavirus
vaccinations and range in cover from four to nine different strains known to
cause human disease. Most countries currently only supply vaccination to females;
however, recent data point towards both a personal benefit as well as a
cost-effective population-based benefit with gender-neutral vaccination. Data
from female vaccination only have shown the vaccine to be effective in preventing
premalignant cervical lesions, and are believed to have the same effect for other
human papillomavirus cancers. Male vaccination not only provides personal benefit
but also has a "herd effect" for females by preventing the propagation of the
virus.
CONCLUSION: Gender-neutral vaccination provides significant cost-effective
benefits for preventing human papillomavirus-related diseases, and this effect is
further enhanced by the use of the nonavalent vaccine.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-018-4866-y 
PMID: 29327306  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
