

1610. J Virol. 2015 May;89(10):5276-87. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03434-14. Epub 2015 Feb 25.

Human Papillomavirus 16 Oncoprotein Expression Is Controlled by the Cellular
Splicing Factor SRSF2 (SC35).

McFarlane M(1), MacDonald AI(1), Stevenson A(1), Graham SV(2).

Author information: 
(1)MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research, Institute of Infection,
Immunity and Inflammation, College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences,
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland, United Kingdom.
(2)MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research, Institute of Infection,
Immunity and Inflammation, College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences,
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland, United Kingdom Sheila.Graham@gla.ac.uk.

High-risk human papillomaviruses (HR-HPV) cause anogenital cancers, including
cervical cancer, and head and neck cancers. Human papillomavirus 16 (HPV16) is
the most prevalent HR-HPV. HPV oncogenesis is driven by two viral oncoproteins,
E6 and E7, which are expressed through alternative splicing of a polycistronic
RNA to yield four major splice isoforms (E6 full length, E6*I, E6*II, E6*X). The 
production of multiple mRNA isoforms from a single gene is controlled by
serine/arginine-rich splicing factors (SRSFs), and HPV16 infection induces
overexpression of a subset of these, SRSFs 1, 2, and 3. In this study, we
examined whether these proteins could control HPV16 oncoprotein expression. Small
interfering RNA (siRNA) depletion experiments revealed that SRSF1 did not affect 
oncoprotein RNA levels. While SRSF3 knockdown caused some reduction in E6E7
expression, depletion of SRSF2 resulted in a significant loss of E6E7 RNAs,
resulting in reduced levels of the E6-regulated p53 proteins and E7 oncoprotein
itself. SRSF2 contributed to the tumor phenotype of HPV16-positive cervical
cancer cells, as its depletion resulted in decreased cell proliferation, reduced 
colony formation, and increased apoptosis. SRSF2 did not affect transcription
from the P97 promoter that controls viral oncoprotein expression. Rather, RNA
decay experiments showed that SRSF2 is required to maintain stability of E6E7
mRNAs. These data show that SRSF2 is a key regulator of HPV16 oncoprotein
expression and cervical tumor maintenance.IMPORTANCE: Expression of the HPV16
oncoproteins E7 and E6 drives HPV-associated tumor formation. Although increased 
transcription may yield increased levels of E6E7 mRNAs, it is known that the RNAs
can have increased stability upon integration into the host genome. SR splicing
factors (SRSFs) control splicing but can also control other events in the RNA
life cycle, including RNA stability. Previously, we demonstrated increased levels
of SRSFs 1, 2, and 3 during cervical tumor progression. Now we show that SRSF2 is
required for expression of E6E7 mRNAs in cervical tumor but not nontumor cells
and may act by inhibiting their decay. SRSF2 depletion in W12 tumor cells
resulted in increased apoptosis, decreased proliferation, and decreased colony
formation, suggesting that SRSF2 has oncogenic functions in cervical tumor
progression. SRSF function can be targeted by known drugs that inhibit SRSF
phosphorylation, suggesting a possible new avenue in abrogating HPV oncoprotein
activity.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.03434-14 
PMCID: PMC4442513
PMID: 25717103  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
