

1613. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol). 2013 Nov;25(11):630-8. doi:
10.1016/j.clon.2013.07.003. Epub 2013 Jul 31.

The prognostic significance of the biomarker p16 in oropharyngeal squamous cell
carcinoma.

Oguejiofor KK(1), Hall JS, Mani N, Douglas C, Slevin NJ, Homer J, Hall G, West
CM.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Radiobiology Group, Institute of Cancer Sciences, Manchester
Academic Health Science Centre, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

Comment in
    Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol). 2014 Mar;26(3):175-7.

AIMS: There is an increasing incidence of human papillomavirus (HPV)-positive
oropharyngeal squamous cell cancers (OPSCC) mostly associated with favourable
outcomes. p16 immunohistochemistry is a surrogate marker for HPV positivity in
OPSCC. The prognostic strength of p16 over traditional prognostic factors is not 
fully characterised. In this study, we evaluated the clinical and demographic
differences between p16-positive and -negative OPSCC and characterised its
prognostic strength versus traditional prognostic factors.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded blocks and clinical
information from 217 OPSCC patients, treated with radiotherapy (alone or in
combination with other therapies) between 2000 and 2010 were collected
retrospectively. Immunohistochemistry for p16 protein was carried out;
cancer-specific survival (CSS), recurrence-free survival (RFS) and locoregional
control (LRC) were calculated for both univariate and multivariate analyses.
RESULTS: Ninety-two per cent of the OPSCC originated from tonsil and tongue base 
sites, 61% were p16 positive. Patients with p16-positive OPSCC were younger (P < 
0.0001), with lower alcohol (P = 0.0002) and tobacco (P = 0.0001) exposure. The
tumours were less differentiated (P = 0.0069), had a lower T stage (P = 0.0027), 
higher nodal status (P = 0.014) and higher American Joint Committee on Cancer
(AJCC) prognostic group (P = 0.0036). AJCC prognostic group was significant for
RFS (P = 0.0096) and CSS (P = 0.018) in patients with p16-negative OPSCC, but not
those with p16-positive tumours (P = 0.30 and 0.54). Other significant factors
for CSS and RFS in univariate analysis were: pretreatment haemoglobin (P < 0.0001
and <0.0001), chemoradiotherapy (P = 0.005 and 0.03) and P16 status (P < 0.0001
and 0.0001). In multivariate analysis, p16 positivity was the strongest
independent prognostic variable for both CSS, RFS and LRC (P < 0.0001, hazard
ratio 4.15; 95% confidence interval 2.43-7.08), (P < 0.0001, hazard ratio 6.15;
95% confidence interval 3.57-10.61) and (P = 0.001, hazard ratio 3.74; confidence
interval 1.76-7.95).
CONCLUSION: This study shows that p16 is the single most important prognostic
variable in OPSCC, surpassing traditional prognostic factors for both CSS and
RFS. Furthermore, disease stage has no prognostic significance in p16-positive
patients, highlighting the need for routine p16 assessment in OPSCC.

Copyright Â© 2013 The Royal College of Radiologists. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clon.2013.07.003 
PMID: 23916365  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
