

1619. CA Cancer J Clin. 2013 Jan;63(1):57-81. doi: 10.3322/caac.21167. Epub 2012 Dec
19.

The role of human papillomavirus in nongenital cancers.

Zandberg DP(1), Bhargava R, Badin S, Cullen KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of
Maryland School of Medicine and Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum Cancer Center,
University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Human papillomavirus (HPV), one of the most common sexually transmitted diseases 
worldwide, has an established role in the pathogenesis of genital malignancies
such as cervical cancer. The virus has also been implicated in the oncogenesis of
nongenital cancers including head and neck malignancies (specifically
oropharyngeal cancers) as well as anal cancer. There is less clarity regarding
its role in lung and esophageal cancers. Worldwide, the incidence and prevalence 
of HPV-associated oropharyngeal cancer has been increasing over time. These
patients have improved outcomes compared with those with HPV-negative
oropharyngeal cancers, and there is continued interest in designing treatments
specifically for this HPV-positive subgroup. Clinicians continue to gain an
understanding of HPV in anal cancers and the risk factors associated with
infection and progression to malignancy. This has potential implications for the 
eventual screening of high-risk groups. While HPV vaccination is currently
approved for the prevention of cervical cancer, it also has potential in the
prevention of all HPV-associated malignancies. In this review, current
understanding of the role of HPV in nongenital cancers is discussed, as well as
future implications for treatment and prevention.

Copyright Â© 2012 American Cancer Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.3322/caac.21167 
PMID: 23258613  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
