

1622. J Photochem Photobiol B. 2013 Oct 5;127:114-22. doi:
10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2013.07.020. Epub 2013 Aug 6.

FosPeg® PDT alters the EBV miRNAs and LMP1 protein expression in EBV positive
nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells.

Wu RW(1), Chu ES, Huang Z, Xu CS, Ip CW, Yow CM.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Laboratory Science Section, Department of Health Technology &
Informatics, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong Special Administrative
Region.

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is one of the top ten cancers highly prevalent in 
Hong Kong and South China. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection contributes to the 
tumorigenesis of NPC through the expression of different viral proteins. Among
these, Latent Membrane Protein 1(LMP1) is the major oncoprotein expressed by EBV.
Foscan® (Biolitec AG), m-tetrahydroxyphenylchlorin (mTHPC)-based photosensitizing
drug, has been used in the photodynamic therapy (PDT) for head and neck cancers. 
FosPeg® (Biolitec AG) is a new formulation of mTHPC contained in PEGylated
liposomes with optimized distribution properties. In this in vitro study, the
potential of FosPeg®-PDT on human EBV positive NPC cell (c666-1) and EBV negative
cells (HK1 and CNE2) were investigated. Effects of FosPeg®-PDT on the expression 
of EBV BART miRNAs (EBV miRNA BART 1-5p, BART 16, and BART 17-5p), LMP1 mRNA and 
proteins on c666-1 cells were also elucidated. The killing efficacy of
FosPeg®-PDT on NPC cells were determined by MTT assay after LED activation.
Effects of FosPeg®-PDT on the expression of LMP1 mRNA and protein were examined
by real time PCR and western blot analysis. FosPeg®-PDT demonstrated its
antitumor effect on c666-1 cells in a drug and light dose dependent manner. LD30,
LD50 and LD70 were achieved by applying LED activation (3J/cm(2)) at 4h post
incubated cells with 0.05μg/ml, 0.07μg/ml and 0.3μg/ml FosPeg®, respectively.
Up-regulation of both LMP1 mRNA and protein were observed after FosPeg®-PDT in a 
dose dependent manner. FosPeg®-PDT exerted antitumor effect on c666-1 cells
through up-regulation of LMP1 protein. Understanding the mechanism of FosPeg®-PDT
may help to develop better strategies for the treatment of NPC.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2013.07.020 
PMID: 24013466  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
