

1625. Gene Ther. 2011 Sep;18(9):884-90. doi: 10.1038/gt.2011.33. Epub 2011 Apr 7.

Selective atonal gene delivery improves balance function in a mouse model of
vestibular disease.

Schlecker C(1), Praetorius M, Brough DE, Presler RG Jr, Hsu C, Plinkert PK,
Staecker H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University of Kansas
School of Medicine, Kansas city, KS, USA.

Loss of balance is often due to loss of vestibular hair cells. In mammals,
regeneration of functional hair cells in the mature sensory epithelium is
limited; therefore, loss of sensory cells can lead to debilitating balance
problems. Delivery of the transcription factor atonal (atoh1) after
aminoglycoside ototoxicity has previously been shown to induce the
transdifferentiation of supporting cells into new hair cells and restore
function. A problem with mouse aminoglycoside models is that the partial loss of 
hair cells seen in human disease is difficult to establish consistently. To more 
closely mirror human clinical balance dysfunction, we have used systemic
application of 3,3'-iminodipropionitrile (IDPN), a vestibulotoxic nitrile
compound known to cause vestibular hair cell loss, to induce a consistent partial
loss of vestibular hair cells. To determine if balance function could be
restored, we delivered atoh1 using a new adenovirus vector, based on Ad28. The
Ad28 adenovector is based on a human serotype with a low seroprevalence that
appears to target gene delivery to vestibular supporting cells. To further
provide cell type selectivity of gene delivery, we expressed atoh1 using the
supporting cell-specific glial fibrillary acid protein promoter. Delivery of this
vector to IDPN-damaged vestibular organs resulted in a significant recovery of
vestibular hair cells and restoration of balance, as measured by time on rotarod 
compared with untreated controls.

DOI: 10.1038/gt.2011.33 
PMCID: PMC3136627
PMID: 21472006  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
