

1634. Mol Cancer Ther. 2010 Jun;9(6):1755-63. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-09-1047. Epub 
2010 Jun 8.

Serum signature of hypoxia-regulated factors is associated with progression after
induction therapy in head and neck squamous cell cancer.

Byers LA(1), Holsinger FC, Kies MS, William WN, El-Naggar AK, Lee JJ, Hu J, Lopez
A, Tran HT, Yan S, Du Z, Ang KK, Glisson BS, Raso MG, Wistuba II, Myers JN, Hong 
WK, Papadimitrakopoulou V, Lippman SM, Heymach JV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Medicine, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Tumor hypoxia regulates many cytokines and angiogenic factors (CAF) and is
associated with worse prognosis in head and neck squamous cell cancer (HNSCC).
Serum CAF profiling may provide information regarding the biology of the host and
tumor, prognosis, and response to therapy. We investigated 38 CAFs in HNSCC
patients receiving induction therapy on a phase II trial of carboplatin,
paclitaxel, and cetuximab. CAFs were measured by multiplex bead assay and
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in 32 patients. Baseline and postinduction CAF 
levels were correlated with disease progression (PD) and human papilloma virus
(HPV) status by Wilcoxon rank sum test. Baseline levels of eight
hypoxia-regulated CAFs (the "high-risk signature" including vascular endothelial 
growth factor, interleukins 4 and 8, osteopontin, growth-related oncogene-alpha, 
eotaxin, granulocyte-colony stimulating factor, and stromal cell-derived
factor-1alpha) were associated with subsequent PD. Elevation in >or=6 of 8
factors was strongly associated with shorter time to progression (P = 0.001) and 
was 73% specific and 100% sensitive for PD. Increasing growth-related
oncogene-alpha from baseline to week 6 was also associated with PD.
Progression-free and overall survival were shorter in patients with HPV-negative 
tumors (P = 0.012 and 0.046, respectively), but no individual CAF was associated 
with HPV status. However, among 14 HPV-negative patients, the high-risk CAF
signature was seen in all 6 patients with PD, but only 2 of 14 without PD. In
conclusion, serum CAF profiling, particularly in HPV-negative patients, may be
useful for identifying those at highest risk for recurrence.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-09-1047 
PMCID: PMC2913168
PMID: 20530716  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
