

1639. J Exp Ther Oncol. 2013;10(3):209-14.

Field cancerization: concept and clinical implications in head and neck squamous 
cell carcinoma.

Jaiswal G(1), Jaiswal S(2), Kumar R(1), Sharma A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology & Implantology, Sri Aurobindo College of
Dentistry, Indore, India.
(2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology, Sri Aurobindo College of
Dentistry, Indore, India.
(3)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology, Vyas Dental College and
Hospital, Jodhpur, India.

Cancer begins with multiple cumulative epigenetic and genetic alterations that
sequentially transform a cell or a group of cells in a particular organ. The
early genetic events might lead to clonal expansion of pre-neoplastic daughter
cells in a particular tumor field. Subsequent genomic changes in some of these
cells drive them towards the malignant phenotype. These transformed cells are
diagnosed histopathologically as cancers owing to changes in cell morphology.
Conceivably, a population of daughter cells with early genetic changes (without
histopathology) remains in the organ, demonstrating the concept of field
cancerization. The concept of "field cancerization" was first introduced by
Slaughter et al in 1953 when studying the presence of histologically abnormal
tissue surrounding oral squamous cell carcinoma. It was proposed to explain the
development of multiple primary tumors and locally recurrent cancer. With present
technological advancement and carefully designed studies using appropriate
control tissue will enable identification of important molecular signatures in
these genetically transformed but histologically normal cells. Such
tumor-specific biomarkers should have excellent clinical utility. This review
examines the concept of field cancerization in head and neck cancer and its
possible utility in early detection, tumor progression and clinical significance.


PMID: 24416996  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
