

164. J Dent Res. 2015 Nov;94(11):1532-43. doi: 10.1177/0022034515605456. Epub 2015 Sep
9.

HPV Infection of the Head and Neck Region and Its Stem Cells.

Pullos AN(1), Castilho RM(1), Squarize CH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Epithelial Biology, Department of Periodontics and Oral
Medicine, University of Michigan School of Dentistry, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Epithelial Biology, Department of Periodontics and Oral
Medicine, University of Michigan School of Dentistry, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
csquariz@umich.edu.

The human papillomavirus (HPV) is an etiologic agent associated with the
development of head and neck squamous carcinoma (HNSCC)-in particular,
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma. The HPV-positive HNSCC is characterized by
genetic alterations, clinical progression, and therapeutic response, which are
distinct from HPV-negative head and neck cancers, suggesting that
virus-associated tumors constitute a unique entity among head and neck cancers.
Malignant stem cells, or cancer stem cells, are a subpopulation of tumor cells
that self-renew, initiate new tumors upon transplantation, and are resistant to
therapy, and their discovery has revealed novel effects of oncovirus infection in
cancer. In this review, we provide a virus-centric view and novel insights into
HPV-positive head and neck pathogenesis. We discuss the influence of cancer stem 
cells, HPV oncoproteins, altered molecular pathways, and mutations in cancer
initiation and cancer progression. We compiled a catalogue of the mutations
associated with HPV-positive HNSCC, which may be a useful resource for
genomic-based studies aiming to develop personalized therapies. We also explain
recent changes in mass vaccination campaigns against HPV and the potential
long-term impact of vaccinations on the prevention and treatment of HPV-positive 
head and neck cancers.

Â© International & American Associations for Dental Research 2015.

DOI: 10.1177/0022034515605456 
PMID: 26353884  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
