

1645. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Dec;36(12):1874-82. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e318265fb2b.

Detection of transcriptionally active high-risk HPV in patients with head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma as visualized by a novel E6/E7 mRNA in situ
hybridization method.

Bishop JA(1), Ma XJ, Wang H, Luo Y, Illei PB, Begum S, Taube JM, Koch WM, Westra 
WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD
21231-2410, USA.

Evidence for transcriptional activation of the viral oncoproteins E6 and E7 is
regarded as the gold standard for the presence of clinically relevant human
papillomavirus (HPV), but detection of E6/E7 mRNA requires RNA extraction and
polymerase chain reaction amplification-a challenging technique that is
restricted to the research laboratory. The development of RNA in situ
hybridization (ISH) probes complementary to E6/E7 mRNA permits direct
visualization of viral transcripts in routinely processed tissues and has opened 
the door for accurate HPV detection in the clinical care setting. Tissue
microarrays containing 282 head and neck squamous cell carcinomas from various
anatomic subsites were tested for the presence of HPV using p16
immunohistochemistry, HPV DNA ISH, and an RNA ISH assay (RNAscope) targeting
high-risk HPV E6/E7 mRNA transcripts. The E6/E7 mRNA assay was also used to test 
an additional 25 oropharyngeal carcinomas in which the HPV status as recorded in 
the surgical pathology reports was equivocal due to conflicting detection results
(ie, p16 positive, DNA ISH negative). By the E6/E7 mRNA method, HPV was detected 
in 49 of 282 (17%) HNSCCs including 43 of 77 (56%) carcinomas from the
oropharynx, 2 of 3 (67%) metastatic HNSCCs of an unknown primary site, 2 of 7
(29%) carcinomas from the sinonasal tract, and 2 of 195 (1%) carcinomas from
other head and neck sites. p16 expression was strongly associated with the
presence of HPV E6/E7 mRNA: 46 of 49 HPV-positive tumors exhibited p16
expression, whereas only 22 of 233 HPV-negative tumors were p16 positive (94% vs.
9%, P<0.0001). There was also a high rate of concordance (99%) between the E6/E7 
mRNA method and HPV DNA ISH. For the selected group of discordant HNSCCs (p16/HPV
DNA), the presence of E6/E7 transcripts was detected in 21 of 25 (84%) cases. The
E6/E7 mRNA method confirmed the presence of transcriptionally active HPV-related 
HNSCC that has a strong predilection for the oropharynx and is strongly
associated with high levels of p16 expression. Testing for HPV E6/E7 transcripts 
by RNA ISH is ideal because it confirms the presence of integrated and
transcriptionally active virus, permits visualization of viral transcripts in
tissues, and is technically feasible for routine testing in the clinical
laboratory.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e318265fb2b 
PMCID: PMC3500437
PMID: 23060353  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
