

1663. Mol Carcinog. 2012 Oct;51 Suppl 1:E54-64. doi: 10.1002/mc.21838. Epub 2011 Nov
15.

Genetic variants of a BH3-only pro-apoptotic gene, PUMA, and risk of
HPV16-associated squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck.

Zhou Z(1), Sturgis EM, Liu Z, Wang LE, Wei Q, Li G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

P53 up-regulated modulator of apoptosis (PUMA) is a critical factor in the
intrinsic apoptotic pathway. Through PUMA-dependent mechanisms, human
papillomavirus 16 (HPV16) oncoprotein may affect apoptosis by E6-mediated p53
degradation. To examine whether the PUMA variants modify the association between 
HPV16 serology and risk of squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN), 
we genotyped two polymorphisms in the PUMA promoter (rs3810294 and rs2032809) in 
380 cases and 335 cancer-free controls of non-Hispanic Whites, who were
frequency-matched by age (±5 yr), sex, smoking, and drinking status. We found
that each individual polymorphism had only a modest impact on risk of SCCHN,
particularly in oropharyngeal cancer for rs3810294 and non-oropharyngeal cancer
for rs2032809. After we stratified the individuals by HPV16 serology, and used
those with the corresponding common homozygous genotype and HPV16 seronegativity 
as the reference group, for each polymorphism we found that the risk of SCCHN
associated with HPV16 seropositivity was higher among those with variant
genotypes than those with the corresponding common homozygous genotype. Notably, 
this effect modification was particularly pronounced in several subgroups
including never smokers, never drinkers, younger patients, and patients with
oropharyngeal cancer. Furthermore, we also characterized the functional relevance
of the two polymorphisms to explore the genotype-phenotype correlation. Our
results suggested that the PUMA promoter polymorphisms may be a biomarker for
risk of HPV16-associated SCCHN, particularly in never smokers, never drinkers,
younger patients, and patients with oropharyngeal cancer. Larger studies are
needed to validate our findings.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mc.21838 
PMCID: PMC3326219
PMID: 22086558  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
