

1664. Innate Immun. 2015 Feb;21(2):215-24. doi: 10.1177/1753425914534002. Epub 2014 May
19.

Therapeutic potential of adenovirus-mediated delivery of β-defensin 2 for
experimental otitis media.

Woo JI(1), Kil SH(1), Brough DE(2), Lee YJ(1), Lim DJ(1), Moon SK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, University of California, Los Angeles,
CA, USA.
(2)GenVec Inc., Rockville, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, University of California, Los Angeles,
CA, USA skmoon@mednet.ucla.edu djlim@mednet.ucla.edu.

Otitis media (OM), one of the most prevalent diseases in young children, is
clinically important owing to its high incidence in children and its potential
impact on language development and motor coordination. OM is the most common
reason for the prescription of antibiotics (accounting for 25% of prescriptions) 
due to its extremely high incidence. A recent increase in antibiotic resistance
among OM pathogens is emerging as a major public health concern globally, which
led us to consider non-antibiotic approaches for the management of OM. In this
study, we evaluated gene transfer of an antimicrobial peptide, human β-defensin 2
(DEFB4), using an adenoviral vector (Ad5 with deletions of E1/E3/E4) as a
potential therapeutic approach. We demonstrated that the transduction of human
β-defensin 2 induces the production of human β-defensin 2 and suppresses
non-typeable Haemophilus influenzae (NTHi) adhesion to human middle ear
epithelial cells. Moreover, intratympanic inoculation of Ad-DEFB4 was found to
attenuate NTHi-induced middle ear effusions without eliciting a significant
immune response. Most importantly, intratympanic inoculation of Ad-DEFB4 appeared
to significantly augment clearance of NTHi from middle ear cavity. Collectively, 
our results suggest that intratympanic gene delivery of antimicrobial molecules
may serve as an alternative/adjuvant approach for the management of OM.

© The Author(s) 2014 Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav.

DOI: 10.1177/1753425914534002 
PMID: 24842664  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
