

1675. Mod Pathol. 2012 Jan;25(1):26-35. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2011.135. Epub 2011 Sep 
2.

Lymphadenoma of the salivary gland: clinicopathological and immunohistochemical
analysis of 33 tumors.

Seethala RR(1), Thompson LD, Gnepp DR, Barnes EL, Skalova A, Montone K, Kane S,
Lewis JS Jr, Solomon LW, Simpson RH, Khan A, Prasad ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Presbyterian University Hospital, Pittsburgh, PA,
USA.

Lymphadenomas (LADs) are rare salivary gland tumors. Their clinicopathologic
characteristics and etiopathogenesis are poorly understood. We examined 33 LADs
in 31 patients (17 women and 14 men) aged 11-79 years (median 65 years). There
were 22 sebaceous LADs in 21 patients (9 women and 12 men) and 11 non-sebaceous
LADs in 10 patients (8 women and 2 men). Two patients had synchronous double
tumors. Twenty-six tumors (79%) arose in parotid, three in the neck, and two each
in submandibular gland and oral cavity. Extraparotid tumors were seen in 2 of 21 
(10%) patients with sebaceous and 4 of 10 (40%) patients with non-sebaceous LADs.
Seven of twenty-three (30%) patients had immunosuppressive therapy for unrelated 
diseases. The tumors were well circumscribed, encapsulated (n=28, 84%) painless
masses, varying in size from 0.6 to 6 cm (median 2.2). The cut surfaces were
gray-tan to yellow, homogeneous and multicystic (n=24, 72%). The epithelial cells
were basaloid, squamous and glandular, forming solid nests, cords, tubules, and
cysts. Sebaceous differentiation was restricted to sebaceous lymphadenoma. The
epithelial cells expressed basal cell markers (p63, 34BE12, and/or CK5/6, 18/18, 
100%) and the luminal glandular cells expressed CK7 (12/12, 100%). Myoepithelial 
cells were absent (n=10/16, 63%) or focal. The lymphoid stroma was reactive, with
germinal centers in 28 (84%). There was no evidence of HPV (0/11), EBV (0/7), and
HHV-8 (0/8). Malignant transformation to sebaceous and basal cell adenocarcinoma 
was seen in one patient each. None of the 11 patients with follow-up (1-8 years) 
recurred. In summary, sebaceous and non-sebaceous LADs are benign, encapsulated, 
solid and cystic tumors affecting older adults. Non-sebaceous LADs affect women
and extraparotid sites more frequently than sebaceous LADs. Altered immune status
may have a role in their etiopathogenesis. Multiple synchronous tumors, origin in
buccal mucosa, and malignant transformation may rarely occur.

DOI: 10.1038/modpathol.2011.135 
PMID: 21892186  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
