

1677. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2012 Nov;269(11):2367-71. doi:
10.1007/s00405-012-2049-9. Epub 2012 May 16.

Transmission of human papillomavirus DNA from patient to surgical masks, gloves
and oral mucosa of medical personnel during treatment of laryngeal papillomas and
genital warts.

Ilmarinen T(1), Auvinen E, Hiltunen-Back E, Ranki A, Aaltonen LM, Pitk√§ranta A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Helsinki University 
Hospital, P.O. Box 220, 00029, Helsinki, Finland. taru.ilmarinen@helsinki.fi

The risk of occupational human papillomavirus (HPV) transmission from patient to 
medical personnel during laser vaporization procedures remains controversial. The
purpose of this study was to determine the risk of HPV transmission from the
patient to the protective surgical masks, gloves and oral mucosa of medical
personnel during the treatment of laryngeal papillomas and genital warts. The
study involved five male patients scheduled for the surgical treatment of
laryngeal papillomas, and five male patients undergoing carbon dioxide (CO(2))
laser treatment for urethral warts. Oral mucosa specimens were obtained from the 
study patients and the employees pre- and postoperatively. Samples were collected
from the HPV-infected patient tissue, and from the surgical masks and gloves used
by the employees. A total of 120 samples were analyzed for the presence of HPV
DNA by PCR, using the degenerated MY09/11/HMB01 primers. After the papilloma
procedures, the surgeons' gloves tested HPV positive in one of the five cases and
those of the surgical nurse in three of the five cases. After the treatment of
genital warts, HPV DNA corresponding to the patient tissue specimens was present 
in all the samples obtained from the surgical gloves of the operators. All oral
mucosa samples obtained from 18 different employees tested HPV negative, as did
the surgical mask specimens. According to our study, HPV may contaminate
protective equipment, most of all surgical gloves, but transmission of HPV DNA to
medical personnel is unlikely to occur provided that protective surgical gloves
and masks are applied and disposed of properly.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-012-2049-9 
PMID: 22588197  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
