

1679. J Control Release. 2009 Dec 16;140(3):256-61. doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2009.05.022.
Epub 2009 May 24.

Silk-elastinlike recombinant polymers for gene therapy of head and neck cancer:
from molecular definition to controlled gene expression.

Gustafson J(1), Greish K, Frandsen J, Cappello J, Ghandehari H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, 84108,
USA; Utah Center for Nanomedicine, Nano Institute of Utah, University of Utah,
Salt Lake City, UT 84108, USA.

Silk-elastinlike protein polymers (SELP's) are block copolymers of silk-like and 
elastin-like tandem repeats. With appropriate sequence and composition SELPs can 
be liquid at room temperature and form hydrogels at body temperature. The
influence of polymer structure and concentration on biodegradation in vitro and
controlled delivery of adenoviruses carrying reporter genes to head and neck
tumors in vivo was evaluated using hydrogels made from three SELP analogs.
SELP-815K, with eight silk and fifteen elastin units and a lysine (K) modified
elastin, was compared to SELP-415K and SELP-47K. Hydrogels with higher silk
content and concentration degraded at a slower rate compared to other analogs.
Intratumoral injection of adenoviruses with SELPs enhanced gene expression in
tumor tissue up to 10 fold compared to viral injection without polymer. Viruses
delivered with SELP-815K at 4 wt.% polymer concentration showed the highest level
of gene expression. Tumor to liver ratio of expression was up to 55 fold higher
for SELP-mediated systems. This study demonstrates the influence of exquisite
control over polymer structure using recombinant techniques on spatial and
temporal control over adenoviral delivery and establishes the utility of SELP
matrices as biodegradable systems for gene therapy of head and neck cancer.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2009.05.022 
PMCID: PMC2788012
PMID: 19470397  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
