

168. Oral Oncol. 2014 Sep;50(9):771-9. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2014.05.004. Epub
2014 Jun 2.

Detection of human papillomavirus (HPV) in clinical samples: evolving methods and
strategies for the accurate determination of HPV status of head and neck
carcinomas.

Westra WH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore,
MD, United States; Department of Oncology, The Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions, Baltimore, MD, United States; Department of Otolaryngology/Head and
Neck Surgery, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD, United
States. Electronic address: wwestra@jhmi.edu.

Much recent attention has highlighted a subset of head and neck squamous cell
carcinomas (HNSCCs) related to human papillomavirus (HPV) that has an
epidemiologic, demographic, molecular and clinical profile which is distinct from
non-HPV-related HNSCC. The clinical significance of detecting HPV in a HNSCC has 
resulted in a growing expectation for HPV testing of HNSCCs. Although the growing
demand for routine testing is understandable and appropriate, it has impelled an 
undisciplined approach that has been largely unsystematic. The current state of
the art has now arrived at a point where a better understanding of HPV-related
tumorigenesis and a growing experience with HPV testing can now move wide scale, 
indiscriminant and non-standardized testing towards a more directed, clinically
relevant and standardized approach. This review will address the current state of
HPV detection; and will focus on why HPV testing is important, when HPV testing
is appropriate, and how to test for the presence of HPV in various clinical
samples. As no single test has been universally accepted as a best method, this
review will consider the strengths and weaknesses of some of the more commonly
used assays, and will emphasize some emerging techniques that may improve the
efficiency of HPV testing of clinical samples including cytologic specimens.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2014.05.004 
PMCID: PMC4318232
PMID: 24932529  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
