

1681. Carcinogenesis. 2009 Dec;30(12):2059-63. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgp277.

MicroRNA expression in head and neck cancer associates with alcohol consumption
and survival.

Avissar M(1), McClean MD, Kelsey KT, Marsit CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Brown University, Box G-E5,
Providence, RI 02912, USA.

The contribution of microRNAs (miRNAs) to carcinogenesis in many tumors,
including head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs), is clear, but the
etiology and clinical significance of their alteration remain important
questions. Our previous work has identified four miRNAs as differentially
expressed HNSCCs compared with non-diseased epithelia and showed that there is
potential diagnostic utility in examining their expression. Here, we used
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction to determine the relative
expression of these miRNAs in a larger independent case series of HNSCC tumors (n
= 169), examining associations of miRNA expression with exposures and clinical
features associated with HNSCC. In multivariate analyses, expression of miR-375
was shown to increase with alcohol consumption (P = 0.002) and showed higher
expression in tumors of pharyngeal and laryngeal origin compared with oral tumors
(P < 0.05 and P < 0.01, respectively). Additionally, high miR-21 expression was
associated with significantly decreased 5 year survival in patients (hazard
ratio, 1.68; 95% CI: 1.04-2.77) in a model controlled for patient age, gender and
tumor stage. Together, these data suggest that alterations in miRNA expression
are related to exposures causal in head and neck cancer and may be useful
biomarkers of patient outcome.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/bgp277 
PMCID: PMC2792323
PMID: 19901002  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
