

1684. J Clin Invest. 2013 Jun;123(6):2488-501. doi: 10.1172/JCI67010. Epub 2013 May 1.

HPV-related methylation signature predicts survival in oropharyngeal squamous
cell carcinomas.

Kostareli E(1), Holzinger D, Bogatyrova O, Hielscher T, Wichmann G, Keck M,
Lahrmann B, Grabe N, Flechtenmacher C, Schmidt CR, Seiwert T, Dyckhoff G, Dietz
A, HÃ¶fler D, Pawlita M, Benner A, Bosch FX, Plinkert P, Plass C, Weichenhan D,
Hess J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

High-risk types of human papilloma virus (HPV) are increasingly associated with
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC). Strikingly, patients with
HPV-positive OPSCC are highly curable with ionizing radiation and have better
survival compared with HPV-negative patients, but the underlying molecular
mechanisms remain poorly understood. We applied an array-based approach to
monitor global changes in CpG island hypermethylation between HPV-negative and
HPV-positive OPSCCs and identified a specific pattern of differentially
methylated regions that critically depends on the presence of viral transcripts. 
HPV-related alterations were confirmed for the majority of candidate gene
promoters by mass spectrometric, quantitative methylation analysis. There was a
significant inverse correlation between promoter hypermethylation of ALDH1A2,
OSR2, GATA4, GRIA4, and IRX4 and transcript levels. Interestingly, Kaplan-Meier
analysis revealed that a combined promoter methylation pattern of low methylation
levels in ALDH1A2 and OSR2 promoters and high methylation levels in GATA4, GRIA4,
and IRX4 promoters was significantly correlated with improved survival in 3
independent patient cohorts. ALDH1A2 protein levels, determined by
immunohistochemistry on tissue microarrays, confirmed the association with
clinical outcome. In summary, our study highlights specific alterations in global
gene promoter methylation in HPV-driven OPSCCs and identifies a signature that
predicts the clinical outcome in OPSCCs.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI67010 
PMCID: PMC3668826
PMID: 23635773  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
