

1685. Public Health Genomics. 2009;12(5-6):291-307. doi: 10.1159/000214920. Epub 2009
Aug 11.

Epidemiology of mucosal human papillomavirus infection and associated diseases.

Trottier H(1), Burchell AN.

Author information: 
(1)Departmentsof Oncology, McGill University, Montreal, Que., Canada.
helen.trottier@umontreal.ca

This article describes the epidemiology of mucosal human papillomavirs (HPV) in
adults and children, its mode of transmission and its associated diseases. Over
40 genotypes of HPV infect the epithelial lining of the anogenital tract and
other mucosal areas of the body. HPV is the most common sexually transmitted
infection globally, with high prevalences found in both females and males. The
predominant route of transmission is via sexual contact, although mother-to-child
transmission is also possible. HPV infection may exist asymptomatically or may
induce the formation of benign or malignant tumours in the genital, oral or
conjunctival mucosa. Although most infections clear spontaneously, those that
persist result in substantial morbidity and invoke high costs associated with the
treatment of clinically relevant lesions. Some 13-18 mucosal HPV types are
considered to have high oncogenic potential. HPV is recognized unequivocally as
the main causal factor for cervical cancer, and is further responsible for a
substantial proportion of many other anogenital neoplasms and head and neck
cancers. Infections with HPV types that have low oncogenic risk, such as HPV-6
and 11, are associated with benign lesions of the anogenital areas known as
condylomata acuminata (genital warts), oral papillomas, conjunctival papillomas, 
as well as low-grade squamous intra-epithelial lesions of the cervix. Perinatally
acquired HPV can also cause recurrent respiratory papillomatosis in infants and
young children. The implementation of HPV vaccination therefore has the potential
to prevent a substantial proportion of HPV-related disease in the future.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000214920 
PMID: 19684442  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
