

1686. Int J Pharm. 2012 May 10;427(2):145-52. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2011.12.056. Epub 
2012 Jan 5.

Investigation on formulation and preparation of adenovirus encoding human
endostatin lyophilized powders.

Chen S(1), Guo D, Guo B, Liu J, Shen Y, Xu X, Huang W, Guo S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China.

A recombinant adenovirus encoding human endostatin gene, E10A, has finished phase
II trials for head and neck cancer. However, the rigid storage temperature
(-80°C) and the toxicity of glycerol in the E10A liquid preparation limited its
clinical application. In this study, lyophilization was applied to develop a
stable E10A lyophilized powder without glycerol that is able to maintain
biological activity at 4°C and suitable for intravenous administration. The E10A 
lyophilized formulations composed of nontoxic and already clinically used
excipients were characterized in terms of the pH change during freezing, the
eutectic melting temperature (T(eu)) and the collapse temperature (T(c)). Freeze 
thawing tests were carried out to examine the protective effect of various
excipients during freezing. Mannitol and its combinations with sucrose or inulin 
showed effective protection of E10A. The E10A lyophilized powders were analyzed
by particle size measurement, residual humidity quantification, infectivity assay
and gene expression level. An optimized formulation (formulation I1) yielded a
good recovery of 76% of the starting infectivity after lyophilization and 89% of 
the original infectivity after storage at 4°C for 180 days. Also the gene
expression capability of E10A in formulation I1 was maintained after
lyophilization. In addition, it was found that the matrix of amorphous
excipients, mannitol combinations with sucrose or inulin, was indispensible in
protecting E10A against the stress of freezing and dehydration. Hereby, the E10A 
lyophilized powder with eliminated glycerol toxicity and improved stability could
enhance the applicability of E10A for cancer gene therapy through intravenous
administration.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2011.12.056 
PMID: 22234038  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
