

1688. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2018 Jun 25;19(6):1711-1716.

HPV Could be a Potential Factor of Survival in Laryngeal Cancer: a Preliminary
Study in Mexican Patients

Peralta R(1), Garcia P, Valdivia A, Lopez A, Apresa T, Hernandez DM, Gallegos F, 
Alvarado-Cabrero I, Vargas-De-Leon C, Davila S, Romero P, Salcedo M.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaci√≥n en Dinamica Celular, Universidad Autonoma del Estado
de Morelos, Cuernavaca , Mexico. Email: masava89@gmail.com

Introduction: In Head and Neck (HN) cancer, the High-Risk Human Papillomavirus
(hr HPV) infection has been associated in about 40% of these tumors. The hr HPV
infection is one of the etiological factors of several epithelial tumors;
however, its association with the prognosis has not yet been established for
patients with Laryngeal Squamous Cell Carcinoma (LSCC). On the other hand,
Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) is a molecular marker widely studied in
cancer and its overexpression has been associated with poor prognosis in some
types of cancer, including the HN cancer. In the present study, we analyzed EGFR 
expression and HPV detection in a cohort of Mexican patients with LSCC and define
their association with clinical-pathological and survival parameters. Methods:
EGFR expression analysis was performed by immunohistochemistry assay. A tissue
array was constructed based on 30 paraffin-embedded tissue samples. HPV detection
was performed by PCR. The results were then compared with the
clinical-pathological variables and outcome measures (Kaplan Meier and Cox
analysis). Results: High expression of EGFR was observed in 43% of the samples
and 20% of HPV detection. The statistical analyses provided evidence of
disassociation between clinical-pathological parameters and EGFR expression, but 
there was an association with poor prognosis. Interestingly, HPV detection is
slightly associated with good prognosis. Conclusion: Both, EGFR overexpression
and HPV presence could be associated with an unfavorable prognosis in patients
with LSCC, independently of other clinical-pathological factors.

Creative Commons Attribution License

DOI: 10.22034/APJCP.2018.19.6.1711 
PMCID: PMC6103592
PMID: 29938470  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
