
Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest to disclose.


1690. Am J Surg Pathol. 2016 Sep;40(9):1261-9. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000666.

Assessing p16 Status of Oropharyngeal Squamous Cell Carcinoma by Combined
Assessment of the Number of Cells Stained and the Confluence of p16 Staining: A
Validation by Clinical Outcomes.

Barasch S(1), Mohindra P, Hennrick K, Hartig GK, Harari PM, Yang DT.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology and Laboratory Medicine §Surgery ∥Human Oncology,
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI
†Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD ‡Department of Pathology, Weill Cornell - New York Presbyterian
Hospital, New York, NY.

Human papillomavirus-related oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) has
favorable prognosis relative to other head and neck squamous cell carcinomas.
Criteria for predicting human papillomavirus status based upon p16 staining,
including difficult cases with partial staining patterns, have been developed;
however, clinical validation of these criteria and the clinical significance of
partial p16 staining have not been reported. Eighty-one archival OPSCC cases were
initially stained for p16 by immunohistochemistry with clone G175-405. The
percentage of p16 cells and percentage of confluence of p16 cells were
categorized as 25%, 26% to 75%, or >75%. Of all cases, 16 (20%) had partial p16
expression, with 26% to 75% p16 cells. Applying previously developed criteria of 
>75% p16 cells or >50% positive cells with >25% confluence, 48 (59%) patients
were categorized p16 and demonstrated expected clinical characteristics and
superior disease-free survival and overall survival (P<0.001) compared with p16
patients. By themselves, the partial staining patients had intermediate outcomes;
however, separating the partial staining cases by degree of confluence showed
that those with >75% confluence had superior disease-free survival (P=0.042).
When the 16 original partial staining cases were re-stained with the alternative 
anti-p16 E6H4 clone, p16 status remained concordant for all cases, but only 3 of 
the 16 were interpreted as demonstrating partial staining. This report shows that
the prevalence of partial p16 staining varies with the antibody utilized and
clinically validates the application of a graded evaluation of both the number as
well as confluence of positive cells for risk stratification of patients with
OPSCC.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000666 
PMCID: PMC4987254
PMID: 27186851  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
