

1691. Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book. 2016;35:176-83. doi: 10.14694/EDBK_161309.

What's New in Head and Neck Cancer: Key Findings in 2015-2016 From ECCO/ESMO,
ASTRO, and the Multidisciplinary Head and Neck Cancer Symposium.

Yom SS(1), Ganti AK(1), Dietz A(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Radiation Oncology, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA; Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE; Department of Head Medicine and Oral Health, 
University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.

Scientific investigation is extremely active in the treatment, management, and
optimization of therapies for patients with head and neck cancer. These issues
have undergone recent rapid evolution in response to a changing epidemiology
based on an increasing proportion of HPV-associated oropharyngeal cancer with
advances in multimodality technologies to improve outcomes and reduce toxicity.
Choices of definitive treatment of various anatomic subsites are being refined,
balancing the relative indications and advantages of surgery or
chemoradiation-based strategies. The major potential influence of HPV-associated 
etiology on therapy selection, prognostic factors, response to treatment,
survival outcomes, and post-treatment surveillance has created a robust and
distinct field of scientific inquiry around this patient subset. Meanwhile, for
patient subsets where prognosis remains poor, therapeutic intensification is
being explored, and for recurrent/metastatic disease, improved selection for
salvage and novel systemic therapies are under development. For all patients with
head and neck cancer, upholding principles of equity and access to the highly
specialized care that results in optimal outcomes should be the goal.

DOI: 10.1200/EDBK_161309 
PMID: 27249698  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
