

1695. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2011 Oct;19(5):341-7. doi:
10.1097/MOO.0b013e328349a125.

Assessment and management of chronic otitis externa.

Kesser BW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Virginia
Health System, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA. Bwk2n@virginia.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Chronic otitis externa (COE) remains a frustrating problem for
both patient and physician. The end stage of disease, medial fibrosing otitis
externa, is very challenging to repair. New and old therapies and promising
approaches to the treatment of this often recalcitrant problem are presented in
this review.
RECENT FINDINGS: Tacrolimus, a nonsteroidal immunosuppressant, and fluocinolone
acetonide oil 0.01%, a medium-high potency steroid preparation, may offer
additional therapeutic options in the struggle against this inflammatory ear
canal/skin condition of often unknown cause. Relative potencies of many steroid
preparations will be presented along with several treatment strategies for
controlling COE. Underlying autoimmune problems such as Sjögren's disease,
sarcoidosis, and amyloidosis must be searched and, if present, addressed and
treated for resolution of symptoms. Cutting edge therapies, including use of
bacteriophages and inflammatory proteases, will also be reviewed.
SUMMARY: No single therapy will be successful for every patient with COE. The
search for an underlying cause, the removal of all possible irritants to the ear 
canal skin (e.g. Q-tips, water), debridement, and both topical and occasionally, 
systemic therapy will control (not cure …) the disease process in the vast
majority of patients.

DOI: 10.1097/MOO.0b013e328349a125 
PMID: 21804382  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
