

1698. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 May 1;20(9):2300-11. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2585.
Epub 2014 Mar 5.

Reverse-phase protein array profiling of oropharyngeal cancer and significance of
PIK3CA mutations in HPV-associated head and neck cancer.

Sewell A(1), Brown B, Biktasova A, Mills GB, Lu Y, Tyson DR, Issaeva N, Yarbrough
WG.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Departments of Surgery Division of Otolaryngology and
Pathology; Yale Cancer Center, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut;
Departments of Otolaryngology and Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, Tennessee; and Systems Biology Department, University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.

PURPOSE: Human papilloma virus (HPV)-associated (HPV+) oropharyngeal squamous
cell carcinomas (OPSCC) have different molecular and biologic characteristics and
clinical behavior compared with HPV-negative (HPV-) OPSCC. PIK3CA mutations are
more common in HPV(+) OPSCC. To define molecular differences and tumor subsets,
protein expression and phosphorylation were compared between HPV(+) and HPV(-)
OPSCC and between tumors with and without PIK3CA mutations.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Expression of 137 total and phosphorylated proteins was
evaluated by reverse-phase protein array in 29 HPV(+) and 13 HPV(-) prospectively
collected OPSCCs. Forty-seven OPSCCs were tested for hotspot-activating mutations
in PIK3CA and AKT. Activation of PIK3CA downstream targets and sensitivity to
pathway inhibitors were determined in HPV(+) head and neck cancer cells
overexpressing wild-type or mutant PIK3CA.
RESULTS: Analyses revealed 41 differentially expressed proteins between HPV(+)
and HPV(-) OPSCC categorized into functional groups: DNA repair, cell cycle,
apoptosis, phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT/mTOR, and receptor kinase
pathways. All queried DNA repair proteins were significantly upregulated in
HPV(+) samples. A total of 8 of 33 HPV(+) and 0 of 14 HPV(-) tumors contained
activating PIK3CA mutations. Despite all activating PIK3CA mutations occurring in
HPV(+) samples, HPV(+) tumors had lower mean levels of activated AKT and
downstream AKT target phosphorylation. Ectopic expression of mutant PIK3CA in
HPV(+) cells increased mTOR, but not AKT activity. HPV E6/E7 overexpression
inhibited AKT phosphorylation in HPV-negative cells. Mutant PIK3CA overexpressing
cells were more sensitive to a dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor compared with an AKT
inhibitor.
CONCLUSIONS: Protein expression analyses suggest that HPV(+) and HPV(-) OPSCC
differentially activate DNA repair, cell cycle, apoptosis, PI3K/AKT/mTOR, and
receptor kinase pathways. PIK3CA mutations are more common in HPV(+) OPSCC and
are associated with activation of mTOR, but not AKT. These data suggest that
inhibitors for mTOR may have activity against HPV(+) PIK3CA mutant oropharyngeal 
cancers.

Â©2014 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2585 
PMCID: PMC4027970
PMID: 24599934  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
