

1699. Cancer Biol Ther. 2015;16(8):1252-8. doi: 10.1080/15384047.2015.1056418. Epub
2015 Jun 5.

Decreased SMAD4 expression is associated with induction of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and cetuximab resistance in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma.

Cheng H(1), Fertig EJ, Ozawa H, Hatakeyama H, Howard JD, Perez J, Considine M,
Thakar M, Ranaweera R, Krigsfeld G, Chung CH.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Oncology , Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions , Baltimore , MD
USA.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is frequently overexpressed in head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) and cetuximab, a monoclonal antibody
targeting this receptor, is widely used to treat these patients. In the following
investigation, we examined the role of SMAD4 down-regulation in mediating
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and cetuximab resistance in HNSCC. We 
determined that SMAD4 downregulation was significantly associated with increased 
cell motility, increased expression of vimentin, and cetuximab resistance in
HNSCC cell lines. In the HNSCC genomic dataset obtained from The Cancer Genome
Atlas, SMAD4 was altered in 20/279 (7%) of HNSCC via homozygous deletion, and
nonsense, missense, and silent mutations. When SMAD4 expression was compared with
respect to human papillomavirus (HPV) status, HPV-positive tumors had higher
expression compared to HPV-negative tumors. Furthermore, higher SMAD4 expression 
also correlated with higher CDKN2A (p16) expression. Our data suggest that SMAD4 
down-regulation plays an important role in the induction of EMT and cetuximab
resistance. Patients with higher SMAD4 expression may benefit from cetuximab use 
in the clinic.

DOI: 10.1080/15384047.2015.1056418 
PMCID: PMC4623002
PMID: 26046389  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
