

170. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 31;10(7):e0132307. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132307.
eCollection 2015.

The Additive Value of Femoral Ultrasound for Subclinical Atherosclerosis
Assessment in a Single Center Cohort of 962 Adults, Including High Risk Patients 
with Rheumatoid Arthritis, Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection and Type 2
Diabetes Mellitus.

Protogerou AD(1), Fransen J(2), Zampeli E(1), Argyris AA(3), Aissopou E(3), Arida
A(1), Konstantonis GD(1), Tentolouris N(3), Makrilakis K(3), Psichogiou M(3),
Daikos G(3), Kitas GD(4), Sfikakis PP(1).

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Propaedeutic & Internal Medicine, Laikon Hospital, Athens,
Greece; Joint Academic Rheumatology Program of the National and Kapodistrian
University of Athens Medical School, Athens, Greece.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.
(3)First Department of Propaedeutic & Internal Medicine, Laikon Hospital, Athens,
Greece.
(4)Department of Rheumatology, Dudley Group NHS Foundation Trust, Dudley, United 
Kingdom; Arthritis Research UK Epidemiology Unit, University of Manchester,
Manchester, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Presence of femoral atheromatic plaques, an emerging cardiovascular
disease (CVD) biomarker additional to carotid plaques, is poorly investigated in 
conditions associating with accelerated atherosclerosis such as Rheumatoid
Arthritis (RA), Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infection and Type 2 Diabetes 
Mellitus (T2DM).
OBJECTIVE/METHODS: To assess the frequency of femoral/carotid subclinical
atheromatosis phenotypes in RA, HIV and T2DM and search for each disease-specific
probability of either femoral and/or carotid subclinical atheromatosis, we
examined by ultrasound a single-center cohort of CVD-free individuals comprised
of consecutive non-diabetic patients with RA (n=226) and HIV (n=133), T2DM
patients (n=109) and non-diabetic individuals with suspected/known hypertension
(n=494) who served as reference group.
RESULTS: Subclinical atheromatosis--defined as local plaque presence in at least 
on arterial bed--was diagnosed in 50% of the overall population. Among them,
femoral plaques only were found in 25% of either RA or HIV patients, as well as
in 16% of T2DM patients and 35% of reference subjects. After adjusting for all
classical CVD risk factors, RA and HIV patients had comparable probability to
reference group of having femoral plaques, but higher probability (1.75;
1.17-2.63 (odds ratio; 95% confidence intervals), 2.04; 1.14-3.64, respectively) 
of having carotid plaques, whereas T2DM patients had higher probability to have
femoral and carotid plaques, albeit, due to their pronounced dyslipidemic
profile.
CONCLUSION: RA and HIV accelerate predominantly carotid than femoral. A "two
windows" carotid/femoral, rather than carotid alone ultrasound, screening
improves substantially subclinical atheromatosis detection in patients at high
CVD risk.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132307 
PMCID: PMC4521696
PMID: 26230728  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
