

1700. Am J Surg Pathol. 2009 Dec;33(12):1771-7. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181ba7b73.

Merkel cell polyomavirus: a specific marker for Merkel cell carcinoma in
histologically similar tumors.

Duncavage EJ(1), Le BM, Wang D, Pfeifer JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Division of Anatomic and Molecular
Pathology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA.
eric.duncavage@hsc.utah.edu

Comment in
    Am J Dermatopathol. 2011 May;33(3):329-30.

The recently described Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCPyV) is reportedly present in 
50% to 80% of Merkel cell carcinomas (MCC). Although the virus has been shown to 
be absent from other cutaneous neoplasms, its association with malignancies that 
are histologically similar to MCC, specifically small cell carcinoma of the lung 
and other high-grade neuroendocrine tumors, has yet to be thoroughly
investigated. To address this issue, we identified a set of 74 cases of visceral 
high-grade neuroendocrine tumors from a variety of anatomic sites, including 32
cases from the lung, 16 cases from the gastrointestinal tract, 20 cases from the 
female reproductive system, 3 cases from soft tissue, 2 cases from the head and
neck region, and 1 case from the bladder. Using a set of primers optimized to
detect MCPyV in formalin-fixed tissue, polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based
testing showed evidence of MCPyV DNA in only 1 of the 74 tumors; however,
clinicopathologic review of the positive case (a neuroendocrine tumor of the
small intestine) disclosed that the patient had a history of primary MCC of the
buttock. PCR-based testing also showed no evidence of the related WU and KI
polyomaviruses in the set of 74 cases. We conclude that, when evaluated by
PCR-based testing, MCPyV is a specific marker for MCC that can be helpful in
distinguishing cases of metastatic MCC from other high-grade neuroendocrine
tumors. Our results also suggest that MCPyV does not have a role in the
oncogenesis of visceral high-grade neuroendocrine tumors.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181ba7b73 
PMID: 19809278  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
