

1701. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Mar 19;393(4):598-602. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.02.021. Epub 2010 Feb 10.

Influence of polymorphism in dendritic cell-specific intercellular adhesion
molecule-3-grabbing nonintegrin-related (DC-SIGNR) gene on HIV-1 trans-infection.

Zhu D(1), Kawana-Tachikawa A, Iwamoto A, Kitamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Advanced Clinical Research Center, Institute 
of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo
108-8639, Japan. zhu@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp

The dendritic cell-specific intercellular adhesion molecule-3-grabbing
nonintegrin (DC-SIGN) and DC-SIGN-related (DC-SIGNR) molecules on the cell
surface are known to enhance human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
infection by capturing the virions and transmitting them to CD4+ T-cell, a
process termed trans-infection. The neck region and carbohydrate recognition
domain of the two proteins are important for efficient binding to the HIV-1
envelope protein. DC-SIGNR is polymorphic in Exons 4 and 5 that encode the neck
region and carbohydrate recognition domain, respectively; the former contains a
variable number of tandem repeats, and the latter the SNP (rs2277998). Since it
remains unclear whether the DC-SIGNR polymorphism is related to the risk of HIV-1
infection, we tested possible effects of the polymorphism on HIV-1
trans-infection efficiency, by constructing six kinds of cDNAs encoding DC-SIGNR 
variants with various numbers of repeat units and various SNP. We were able to
express the variants on the surface of Raji cells, a human B cell line. Flow
cytometry showed that all the tested DC-SIGNR molecules were efficiently
expressed on the cell surface at various levels; the assay for HIV
trans-infection efficacy showed that all the tested variants had that activity
with different efficacy levels. We found a correlation between the HIV
trans-infection efficiency and the mean fluorescent intensity of DC-SIGNR
expression (R(2)=0.95). Thus, our results suggest that the variation of the
tested DC-SIGNR genotypes affects the efficacy of trans-infection by affecting
the amounts of the protein expressed on the cell surface.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.02.021 
PMID: 20152818  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
