

1702. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2015 Apr;23(4):266-72. doi:
10.1097/PDM.0000000000000036.

Hybrid Capture 2 is as effective as PCR testing for high-risk human
papillomavirus in head and neck cancers.

Hooper JE(1), Hebert JF, Schilling A, Gross ND, Schindler JS, Lagowski JP,
Kulesz-Martin M, Corless CL, Morgan TK.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology ‡Otolaryngology §Dermatology Research Division
†Knight Diagnostic Laboratory, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland,
OR.

High-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is a common cause of oropharyngeal
squamous cell carcinoma, especially in young male nonsmokers. Accurately
diagnosing HPV-associated oral cancers is important, because they have a better
prognosis and may be treated differently than smoking-related oral carcinomas.
Various methods have been validated to test for high-risk HPV in cervical tissue 
samples, and they are in routine clinical use to detect dysplasia before it
progresses to invasive disease. Similarly, future screening for HPV-mediated
oropharyngeal dysplasia may identify patients before it progresses. Our objective
was to compare 4 of these methods in a retrospective series of 87 oral and
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas that had archived fresh-frozen and
paraffin-embedded tissue for evaluation. Patient age, sex, smoking history, and
tumor location were also recorded. DNA prepared from fresh-frozen tissue was
tested for HPV genotypes by multiplex polymerase chain reaction analysis, and
high-risk HPV screening was carried out using Hybrid Capture 2 and Cervista.
Histologic sections were immunostained for p16. HPV-positive outcome was defined 
as agreement between at least 2 of the 3 genetic tests and used for χ analysis
and calculations of diagnostic predictive value. As expected, high-risk
HPV-positive oral cancers were most common in the tonsil and base of the tongue
(oropharynx) of younger male (55 vs. 65 y) (P=0.0002) nonsmokers (P=0.01). Most
positive cases were HPV16 (33/36, 92%). Hybrid Capture 2 and Cervista were as
sensitive as polymerase chain reaction and had fewer false positives than p16
immunohistochemical staining.

DOI: 10.1097/PDM.0000000000000036 
PMCID: PMC4116481
PMID: 25839700  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
