

1703. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 11;9(6):e99114. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099114. eCollection
2014.

Recurrent respiratory papillomatosis: HPV genotypes and risk of high-grade
laryngeal neoplasia.

Omland T(1), Lie KA(2), Akre H(1), Sandlie LE(2), Jebsen P(2), Sandvik L(3),
Nymoen DA(2), Bzhalava D(4), Dillner J(4), Br√∏ndbo K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, Oslo University
Hospital and University of Oslo, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Department of Pathology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Oslo University Hospital and University of Oslo, 
Faculty of Dentistry, Oslo, Norway.
(4)Departments of Laboratory Medicine, Medical Epidemiology & Biostatistics,
Karolinska Institute and Department of Clinical Microbiology and Pathology,
Karolinska Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

Patients with recurrent respiratory papillomatosis (RRP) in Norway treated
between 1987 and 2009 were recruited to this cohort study. They were followed
from disease onset and data recorded until January 2012. Here, we describe the
distribution of human papillomavirus (HPV) genotypes, the prevalence of multiple 
HPV infections, and the risk of high-grade laryngeal neoplasia and respiratory
tract invasive carcinoma in a large cohort of patients with RRP. We also examined
whether HPV genotype, gender, age or clinical course are risk factors for this
development. Clinical records and histological specimens were reviewed. Using
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded biopsies, HPV genotyping were performed by
quantitative polymerase chain reaction assays identifying 15 HPV types.
HPV-negative specimens were analyzed by metagenomic sequencing. Paraffin blocks
were available in 224/238 patients. The DNA quality was approved in 221/224
cases. HPV DNA was detected in 207/221 patients and all were HPV 6 or HPV 11
positive, comprising HPV 6 in 133/207, HPV 11 in 40/207 cases and HPV 6/11 in
15/207 cases. Co-infection with one or two high-risk HPV types together with HPV 
6 or HPV 11 was present in 19/207 patients. Metagenomic sequencing of 14
HPV-negative specimens revealed HPV 8 in one case. In total, 39/221 patients
developed high-grade laryngeal neoplasia. 8/221 patients developed carcinoma of
the respiratory tract (six patients with laryngeal carcinoma and two patients
with lung carcinoma). High-grade laryngeal neoplasias were found more frequently 
in HPV-negative versus HPV-positive patients, (RR = 2.35, 95% CI 1.1, 4.99), as
well as respiratory tract carcinomas (RR = 48, 95% CI 10.72, 214.91). In summary,
the majority of RRP were associated with HPV 6 and/or 11. HPV-negative RRP
biopsies occurred more frequently in adult-onset patients, and were associated
with an increased risk of laryngeal neoplasia and carcinoma in the respiratory
tract.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099114 
PMCID: PMC4053369
PMID: 24918765  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
