

1714. Zhonghua Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2011 Aug;46(8):675-80.

[Effect of Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 1 on cell proliferation and cell
cycle in nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Wan RQ(1), Li XP, Wang L, Lu J, Luo HN, Li G, Liu X, Zhang B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolarynology Head and Neck Surgery, Sourthern Medical
University, Guangzhou, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the effect of Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 1 (EBNA1) on
cell proliferation and cell cycle in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) cells.
METHODS: Recombinant lentivirus that encoded EBNA1 short hairpin RNA (shRNA) was 
prepared. The C666-EBNA1 (CE) cells were transduced with lentivirus and selected 
by fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) to repress EBNA1 expression. The
protein expression levels of EBNA1 were examined by Western blot. The effect of
EBNA1 silence on cell proliferation was analyzed by MTT assay and cell growth
assay, respectively. Cell cycle was assessed by flow cytometry. The mRNA and
protein levels of cell cycle regulators were examined by real-time PCR and
Western blot.
RESULTS: Recombinant lentivirus encoded EBNA1 shRNA was successfully constructed.
The EBNA1 expression in CE cells was significantly reduced by lentivirus-mediated
RNA interference. The results of cell counting and MTT assay showed that EBNA1
down-regulation significantly inhibited cell growth in CE-shRNA EBNA1 cells (P < 
0.05). Compared with the control group, the percentage of cells in G0-G1 phase
was increased from (62.43 ± 6.62)% to (89.66 ± 0.64)% (t = -7.091, P = 0.002),
and that in S phase was decreased from (34.93 ± 7.36)% to (7.82 ± 2.44)% (t =
6.095, P = 0.004). The mRNA expressions of c-myc, CDK4, CDK6 and pRb were
decreased by 65.60%, 34.06%, 41.05% and 55.29% respectively with the similar
results in protein expression levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Suppression of EBNA1 may inhibit the growth of nasopharyngeal
carcinoma cells in vitro and induce a G1-phase cell cycle arrest, which might be 
mediated by down-regulation of c-myc, CDK4, CDK6 and pRb.


PMID: 22169551  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
