

1718. Wien Med Wochenschr. 2010 Jun;160(11-12):305-309. doi: 10.1007/s10354-010-0782-5.

Human papillomavirus in head and neck tumors: epidemiological, molecular and
clinical aspects.

Klozar J(1), Tachezy R(2), Rotnáglová E(3)(2), Košlabová E(3)(2), Saláková M(2), 
Hamšíková E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, First Medical Faculty,
Charles University Prague, Prague, Czech Republic. jan.klozar@lfmotol.cuni.cz.
(2)Department of Experimental Virology, Institute of Hematology and Blood
Transfusion, Prague, Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, First Medical Faculty,
Charles University Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.

High-risk types of human papillomaviruses (HR HPV) play an important role in the 
etiology of a group of head and neck squamous cell cancers (HNSCC). This review
is focused on epidemiological, molecular, and clinical aspects of HPV infection
in head and neck cancer. High risk HPV DNA is being detected in a very different 
proportion of HNSCC with the highest prevalence in oropharynx. Patients with
HPV-associated tumors are characterized by moderate tobacco and alcohol
consumption. Some aspects of sexual behavior may represent a risk factor.
Recently, it has been shown that HPV infection is spreading and the rising
prevalence of HPV-positive tumors can probably be attributed to this epidemic. On
molecular level the viral oncoproteins E6 and E7 were shown to be involved in
oncogenesis. HPV-positive cancers have better prognosis and HPV status should be 
considered in clinical decision-making. The rising proportion of HPV-positive
tumors underlines the importance of HPV vaccination also for the prevention of
HNSCC.

DOI: 10.1007/s10354-010-0782-5 
PMID: 20640929  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
