

1723. Mol Immunol. 2018 Apr;96:28-36. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2018.02.005. Epub 2018 Feb 
22.

Immunological network analysis in HPV associated head and neck squamous cancer
and implications for disease prognosis.

Chen X(1), Yan B(1), Lou H(1), Shen Z(1), Tong F(1), Zhai A(2), Wei L(3), Zhang
F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Harbin Medical University, 157 Baojian Road,
Harbin 150081, China.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Harbin Medical University, 157 Baojian Road,
Harbin 150081, China; Wu Lien-Teh Institute, Harbin Medical University, 157
Baojian Road, Harbin 150081, China.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Harbin Medical University, 157 Baojian Road,
Harbin 150081, China; Wu Lien-Teh Institute, Harbin Medical University, 157
Baojian Road, Harbin 150081, China. Electronic address: weilanlan_1119@163.com.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Harbin Medical University, 157 Baojian Road,
Harbin 150081, China; Wu Lien-Teh Institute, Harbin Medical University, 157
Baojian Road, Harbin 150081, China. Electronic address:
fengminzhang@ems.hrbmu.edu.cn.

Human papillomavirus-positive (HPV+) head and neck squamous cell cancer (HNSCC)
exhibits a better prognosis than HPV-negative (HPV-) HNSCC. This difference may
in part be due to enhanced immune activation in the HPV+ HNSCC tumor
microenvironment. To characterize differences in immune activation between HPV+
and HPV- HNSCC tumors, we identified and annotated differentially expressed genes
based upon mRNA expression data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). Immune
network between immune cells and cytokines was constructed by using single sample
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis and conditional mutual information. Multivariate Cox
regression analysis was used to determine the prognostic value of immune
microenvironment characterization. A total of 1673 differentially expressed genes
were functionally annotated. We found that genes upregulated in HPV+ HNSCC are
enriched in immune-associated processes. And the up-regulated gene sets were
validated by Gene Set Enrichment Analysis. The microenvironment of HPV+ HNSCC
exhibited greater numbers of infiltrating B and T cells and fewer neutrophils
than HPV- HNSCC. These findings were validated by two independent datasets in the
Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. Further analyses of T cell subtypes
revealed that cytotoxic T cell subtypes predominated in HPV+ HNSCC. In addition, 
the ratio of M1/M2 macrophages was much higher in HPV+ HNSCC. The infiltration of
these immune cells was correlated with differentially expressed
cytokine-associated genes. Enhanced infiltration of B cells and CD8+ T cells were
identified as independent protective factors, while high neutrophil infiltration 
was a risk enhancing factor for HPV+ HNSCC patients. A schematic model of
immunological network was established for HPV+ HNSCC to summarize our findings.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2018.02.005 
PMID: 29477933  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
