

1724. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2011 Feb;4(2):207-17. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-10-0147.

Characterization of the methylation patterns in human papillomavirus type 16
viral DNA in head and neck cancers.

Park IS(1), Chang X, Loyo M, Wu G, Chuang A, Kim MS, Chae YK, Lyford-Pike S,
Westra WH, Saunders JR, Sidransky D, Pai SI.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, The Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) type 16 can integrate into the host genome, thereby
rendering the viral coding genes susceptible to epigenetic modification. Using
bisulfite genomic sequencing, we determined the methylation status of all 110 CpG
sites within the viral epigenome in advanced stage III/IV HPV-16-associated head 
and neck cancers. We found that the viral genome was hypomethylated in the
majority of head and neck cancers, in particular within the viral regulatory
region, long control region (LCR), which controls transcription of the E6 and E7 
oncogenes. The hypomethylation status of LCR correlated with detectable levels of
E6 and E7 expression, which suggests that the tumors may still be dependent on
these viral oncogenes to maintain the malignant phenotype. In addition to the
methylation status of LCR, we report other potential factors which may influence 
intratumoral E6 and E7 expression including viral copy number and integration
site. We were able to detect the viral epigenetic alterations in sampled body
fluids, such as serum and saliva, which correlated with the changes observed in
the primary tumors. Because viral epigenetic changes occur in the setting of
viral integration into the human genome, the detection of methylated HPV genes in
the serum and/or saliva may have diagnostic potential for early detection
strategies of viral integration and assessment of risk for cancer development in 
high-risk individuals. Our findings also support continued targeting of the E6
and/or E7 antigens through various vaccine strategies against HPV-associated
cancers.

Â©2011 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-10-0147 
PMCID: PMC3079312
PMID: 21292634  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
