

1725. Int J Cancer. 2013 Apr 1;132(7):1565-71. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27821. Epub 2012 Nov
23.

Increasing prevalence rates of HPV attributable oropharyngeal squamous cell
carcinomas in the Netherlands as assessed by a validated test algorithm.

Rietbergen MM(1), Leemans CR, Bloemena E, Heideman DA, Braakhuis BJ, Hesselink
AT, Witte BI, Baatenburg de Jong RJ, Meijer CJ, Snijders PJ, Brakenhoff RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, VU University Medical
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection has been etiologically linked to
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC). The prevalence of HPV-positive
OPSCC varies between studies, ranging from 20 to 90%. This may be related to the 
lack of a standardized HPV detection assay as well as to the time period in which
HPV prevalence is investigated, as rising incidence rates are reported over the
last decades. Here, we validated our previously defined test algorithm for HPV
detection in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumor specimen consisting of
p16(INK4A) immunostaining followed by high-risk HPV DNA detection by GP5+/6+ PCR 
on the positive cases (Smeets et al., Int J Cancer 2007;121:2465-72). In
addition, we analyzed HPV prevalence rates in OPSCCs in the years 1990-2010. The 
test algorithm was validated on a consecutive series of 86 OPSCCs collected
during 2008-2011, of which both fresh frozen and FFPE samples were available. We 
performed HPV-E6 RT-PCR on the frozen samples as gold standard and applied the
algorithm to the corresponding FFPE samples. The test algorithm showed an
accuracy of 98%. Using the validated algorithm, we determined the presence of an 
oncogenic HPV infection in 240 OPSCCs of patients diagnosed in the years
1990-2010 at our center. A significant increase in the proportion of HPV-positive
samples was observed, from 5.1% in 1990 to 29.0% in 2010 (p = 0.001). In
conclusion, we confirmed the accuracy of the test algorithm for HPV detection in 
FFPE tumor specimen and we found a significant increase in the prevalence of HPV 
in OPSCC over the last two decades at our center.

Copyright Â© 2012 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.27821 
PMID: 22949073  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
