

1730. Oncology. 2015;89(3):125-36. doi: 10.1159/000381717. Epub 2015 May 8.

Update on Head and Neck Cancer: Current Knowledge on Epidemiology, Risk Factors, 
Molecular Features and Novel Therapies.

Pezzuto F(1), Buonaguro L, Caponigro F, Ionna F, Starita N, Annunziata C,
Buonaguro FM, Tornesello ML.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology and Viral Oncology Unit, Istituto Nazionale Tumori
'Fondazione G. Pascale' - IRCCS, Naples, Italy.

Tobacco use and alcohol consumption are the main risk factors associated with
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) development due to their cytotoxic
and mutagenic effects on the exposed epithelia of the upper aerodigestive tract. 
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and high-risk human papillomaviruses (HPVs), both
encoding viral oncoproteins able to interfere with cell cycle control, have been 
recognized as the etiological agents of nasopharynx carcinoma and a fraction of
oropharyngeal carcinoma, respectively. Head and neck SCC is a deadly disease and 
despite innovative treatments represents a major challenge for patients.
Recently, a number of genomic studies have highlighted the molecular
heterogeneity of head and neck SCC based on methylation profiles, microRNA
expression, mutated genes and new druggable pathways which may represent new
targets for cancer-tailored therapies. To date, cetuximab is the only
FDA-approved anti-epidermal growth factor receptor therapy for the treatment of
head and neck SCC. In addition, a number of monoclonal antibodies targeting AKT, 
mTOR and PI3K pathways are under evaluation. Several therapeutic vaccines against
HPV16 and EBV proteins are also under study. The purpose of this article is to
review the epidemiology, pathogenesis and molecular features of head and neck
SCC, with an emphasis on new therapies.

Â© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000381717 
PMID: 25967534  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
