

1736. J Nucl Med. 2012 Jan;53(1):21-8. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.111.090696.

Prognostic significance of 18F-FDG PET parameters and plasma Epstein-Barr virus
DNA load in patients with nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Chang KP(1), Tsang NM, Liao CT, Hsu CL, Chung MJ, Lo CW, Chan SC, Ng SH, Wang HM,
Yen TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital and Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
changkp@cgmh.org.tw

Erratum in
    J Nucl Med. 2012 Feb;53(2):342.

The plasma concentration of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) DNA is associated with tumor
burden and prognosis in patients with nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC), but data on
the relationship between viral load and (18)F-FDG PET functional parameters are
lacking. We examined the association of (18)F-FDG PET functional parameters and
EBV DNA load with the clinicopathologic characteristics and clinical outcomes of 
patients with NPC.METHODS: One hundred eight patients with NPC who underwent
(18)F-FDG PET before treatment were included in this study. We determined total
lesion glycolysis (TLG) of the primary tumor, the cervical nodes, and their
combination and the maximal standardized uptake value of the primary tumor and
cervical lymph nodes. EBV DNA was measured by real-time polymerase chain
reaction.
RESULTS: EBV DNA was significantly associated with total TLG (R(2) = 0.589).
Total TLG values had the highest correlation with EBV DNA load and were
significantly associated with tumor, nodal, and overall stages. However, tumor
TLG greater than the median (>65 g) was the only parameter significantly
associated with overall, local recurrence-free, disease-free, and distant
metastasis-free survivals (P = 0.033, 0.014, <0.001, and 0.023, respectively).
After allowance for potential confounders, tumor TLG retained its independent
significance for overall and disease-free survival rates (P = 0.045 and 0.006,
respectively).
CONCLUSION: Total TLG values are primarily associated with tumor burden and
clinical stage, whereas tumor TLG is the best predictor of patient survival after
treatment.

DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.111.090696 
PMID: 22213820  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
