

1739. Oral Oncol. 2016 Mar;54:15-27. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2016.01.002. Epub 2016
Jan 18.

Is p16-positive oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma associated with favorable
prognosis? A systematic review and meta-analysis.

Sedghizadeh PP(1), Billington WD(2), Paxton D(2), Ebeed R(2), Mahabady S(2),
Clark GT(2), Enciso R(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Southern California, Ostrow School of Dentistry, 925 West 34th
Street, Los Angeles, CA 90089, United States. Electronic address:
sedghiza@usc.edu.
(2)University of Southern California, Ostrow School of Dentistry, 925 West 34th
Street, Los Angeles, CA 90089, United States.

The purpose of this systematic review and meta-analysis was to compare the
prognosis of patients with p16 expressing oropharyngeal squamous cell cancers to 
patients with p16 non-expressing cancers. Clinical outcomes that were evaluated
included overall survival, local recurrence, disease-free survival,
disease-specific survival, and event-free survival. The following electronic
databases were searched: Cochrane Library, MEDLINE (via Pubmed), and Web of
Science. Publications were restricted to English language. Studies were limited
to controlled clinical trials on the survival rates of patients with
oropharyngeal tumors that were p16 expressing, compared to patients with p16
non-expressing tumors, and at least one clinical endpoint reported by trial
authors (hazard ratios). Specific ascertainment criteria were applied for
inclusion and exclusion of eligible studies. Data was independently extracted in 
duplicate. This systematic review adhered to the Preferred Reporting Items for
Systematic Reviews and Meta-analysis PRISMA checklist. Risk of bias was assessed 
for all included studies, and disagreements between review authors were discussed
until an agreement was reached. Eighteen studies were included for final review
and meta-analysis. The subgroup meta-analyses, which included survival and
recurrence data, showed significantly favorable outcomes for patients with p16
expressing tumors. There is strong evidence to support that patients with p16
expressing oropharyngeal squamous cell cancers have favorable clinical outcomes
and prognosis.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2016.01.002 
PMID: 26794879  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
