

1745. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2015 Jul;272(7):1755-62. doi:
10.1007/s00405-014-3099-y. Epub 2014 Jun 1.

Human papilloma virus and survival of oropharyngeal cancer patients treated with 
surgery and adjuvant radiotherapy.

Broglie MA(1), Soltermann A, Haile SR, Huber GF, Stoeckli SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Kantonsspital St.
Gallen, Rorschacherstrasse 95, 9007, St. Gallen, Switzerland,
martina.broglie@kssg.ch.

Impact of p16 protein, a surrogate marker for human papilloma virus induced
cancer, p53 and EGFR as well as clinical factors on survival in a patient cohort 
with oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) treated by surgical resection 
and adjuvant radiotherapy (RT) ± concomitant chemotherapy (CT). This is a
retrospective analysis of patient's charts and tumor tissue. 57 patients were
consecutively included and their tumor tissue assembled on a tissue microarray
following immunohistochemical analysis. Survival times were estimated by means of
Kaplan-Meier analysis. The importance of clinical and immunohistochemical factors
for outcome was estimated by cox proportional hazard models. With 88% 5-year
overall survival, 91% 5-year disease-specific survival and 91% 5-year
disease-free survival, respectively, we found excellent survival rates in this
surgically treated patient cohort of mainly advanced OPSCC (93% AJCC stage III or
IV). The only factors positively influencing survival were p16 overexpression as 
well as p53 negativity and even more pronounced the combination of those
biomarkers. Survival analysis of patients classified into three risk categories
according to an algorithm based on p16, smoking, T- and N-category revealed a
low, intermediate and high-risk group with significant survival differences
between the low and the high-risk group. Patients with OPSCC can be successfully 
treated by surgery and adjuvant RT ± CT with a clear survival benefit of p16
positive, p53 negative patients. We recommend considering a combination of
immunohistochemical (p16, p53) and clinical factors (smoking, T- and N-category) 
for risk stratification.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-014-3099-y 
PMID: 24880469  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
