

1748. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56622. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056622. Epub 2013 Feb 15.

MicroRNA variants increase the risk of HPV-associated squamous cell carcinoma of 
the oropharynx in never smokers.

Song X(1), Sturgis EM, Liu J, Jin L, Wang Z, Zhang C, Wei Q, Li G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Both microRNAs and human papillomavirus (HPV) infection play an
important role in the development and progression of oral squamous cell carcinoma
(OSCC). In addition, microRNAs affect all facets of the immune/inflammation
responses to infection, which may control HPV clearance. We thus hypothesized
that microRNA polymorphisms modify the association between HPV16 seropositivity
and OSCC risk.
METHODS: Four single-nucleotide polymorphisms in microRNAs were genotyped and
HPV16 serology was determined in 325 cases and 335 matched controls. Odds ratios 
(ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated using univariate and
multivariable logistic regression models.
RESULTS: Overall, each polymorphism had no significant main effect on OSCC risk. 
Compared with the risk among individuals with both miR146 rs2910164 GG genotype
and HPV16 seronegativity, risk of OSCC was increased among those with CG or CC
genotype and HPV16 seronegativity (OR, 1.2; 95% CI, 0.9-1.8), GG genotype and
HPV16 seropositivity (OR, 3.0; 95% CI, 1.8-5.0), and CG or CC genotype and HPV16 
seropositivity (OR, 4.7; 95% CI, 2.3-9.4). Similar results were found for miR149 
rs2292832, miR196 rs11614913, and miR499 rs3746444. Analyses stratified by tumor 
sites and smoking status showed that each polymorphism significantly increased
the risk of HPV16-associated squamous cell carcinoma of the oropharynx (SCCOP),
and such effect modification was particularly prominent in never smokers.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that microRNA polymorphisms modify the risk of 
OSCC associated with HPV16 seropositivity, particularly in patients with SCCOP
and never smokers. Larger studies are needed to verify our findings.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056622 
PMCID: PMC3574010
PMID: 23457596  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
