

1753. Eur J Cancer. 2013 Jul;49(11):2522-30. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2013.03.019. Epub 2013
Apr 6.

CD8+ and CD4+ tumour infiltrating lymphocytes in relation to human papillomavirus
status and clinical outcome in tonsillar and base of tongue squamous cell
carcinoma.

Nordfors C(1), Grün N(1), Tertipis N(1), Ährlund-Richter A(1), Haeggblom L(1),
Sivars L(1), Du J(1), Nyberg T(1), Marklund L(2), Munck-Wikland E(2), Näsman
A(1), Ramqvist T(1), Dalianis T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Karolinska
Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
Electronic address: Tina.Dalianis@ki.se.

Patients with human papillomavirus (HPV) positive tonsillar and base of tongue
squamous cell carcinoma (TSCC and BOTSCC, respectively) have a better clinical
outcome than those with HPV negative tumours, irrespective of treatment. However,
to better individualise treatment, additional biomarkers are needed together with
HPV status. In a pilot study, we showed that high numbers of CD8(+) tumour
infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in HPVDNA+ p16(INK4a+) TSCC indicated a better
outcome. Here this study was extended. Totally 203 TSCC and 77 BOTSCC formalin
fixed paraffin embedded tumour biopsies, earlier tested for HPV DNA (79% HPVDNA+)
and p16(INK4a) from patients treated with curative intention, were analysed for
CD8(+) and CD4(+) TILs by immunohistochemistry. Data obtained for 275 patients
were correlated to HPVDNA and p16(INK4a) status, overall survival (OS) and
disease free survival (DFS). In both HPVDNA+ and HPVDNA+ p16(INK4a+) tumours
higher CD8(+) TIL counts correlated to a better 3-year OS (logrank test, both
p<0.001) and 3-year DFS (logrank test, p = 0.003 and p = 0.004 respectively) as
compared to the lowest quartile in the groups. A similar pattern was observed
when analysing TSCC alone, while for BOTSCC significance was obtained only for
3-year OS. In HPVDNA- tumours the trend was similar, but significance was
obtained again only for 3-year OS. The number of CD4(+) TILs did not generally
correlate to survival. In conclusion, in HPVDNA+ and/or HPVDNA+ p16(INK4a+)
tumours high CD8(+) TIL counts indicated a better 3-year OS. This suggests that
high CD8(+) TIL counts together with HPVDNA+ or HPVDNA+ p16(INK4a+) could be used
when selecting patients for more individualised treatment.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2013.03.019 
PMID: 23571147  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
