
Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


1757. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2016 Sep 8;45(9):636-41. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0529-5807.2016.09.010.

[Clinicopathologic features of non-keratinizing carcinoma of nasal cavity and
paranasal sinus].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao YH(1), Liu HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical University,
Beijing Key Laboratory of Head and Neck Molecular Diagnostic Pathology, Beijing
100730, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the clinicopathologic features, immunophenotype, differential
diagnosis and prognosis of non-keratinizing carcinoma of nasal cavity and
paranasal sinus.
METHODS: Four hundred and forty-one cases of squamous cell carcinoma of the nasal
cavity and sinuses diagnosed in Beijing Tongren Hospital from January 2008 to
August 2015 were included. Twenty-six cases of non-keratinizing carcinomas were
selected. The histopathologic features and the clinicopathologic data of these
twenty-six cases were retrospectively analyzed. Immunohistochemistry (two-step
EnVision method) was done to evaluate the expression of CK, vimentin, CK5/6, CK7,
CK8/18, p16, p53, Ki-67 etc. In situ hybridization was used to detect
Epstein-Barr virus mRNA(EBER), and flow-through hybridization was used to
evaluate the presence of human papilloma virus (HPV). One of the cases which HPV 
is positive was detected by HPV in situ hybridization and RNAscope technology.
RESULTS: The mean age for the twenty-six patients (16 males, 10 females) was 51.2
years (range 22 to 79 years). Three patients had a history of inverted
papilloma.Microscopically the tumors showed invasive papillary and inverted
growth, and formed solid cell nests with different sizes. It was similar to
papillary carcinoma of the urinary tract: the nuclei of the tumor were rounded
and the nucleolus are clear. Three cases displayed transition between normal
epithelium to neoplastic cells; in two cases (2/26), some tumor cells were
spindle shaped. Twenty cases (20/20) were strongly positive for CK, p63; 17 cases
(17/20) were strongly positive for CK5/6 and three cases (3/20) were focally
positive. Sixteen cases were strongly positive for CK8/18 and three cases (3/20) 
were focally positive and one case was negative. Seven cases (7/20) were strongly
positive for CK7 and 13 cases (13/20) were negative. Two cases (2/20) were
focally positive for vimentin and eighteen (18/20) cases were negative. One case 
(1/20) was strongly positive for p16 and nineteen cases (19/20) were negative.
Nineteen cases (19/20) were positive for p53 and one case (1/20) was negative.
Ki-67 index was >50% in 11 cases. Twenty cases (20/20) were negative for AFP,
NUT, S-100 protein, HMB45 and Melan A. One case was positive for HPV (6, 11, 16, 
18), as detected by in situ hybridization. The HPV18 mRNA was detected by
RNAscope technique. In situ hybridization were negative in all twenty cases. The 
mean follow-up time of the patients in this group was less than 5 years, and the 
prognosis needs further observation.
CONCLUSIONS: Non-keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma is a rare neoplasm with
distinct morphological characteristics. Its diagnosis is primarily based on the
site of lesions and the histological features.Immunohistochemistry staining can
aid the diagnosis and differential diagnoses. The tumor may originate from the
epithelium of nasal cavity and sinus. This disease has no relation with HPV and
EBV infection, and the treatment is primarily surgical excision combined with
postoperative radiotherapy.

DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.issn.0529-5807.2016.09.010 
PMID: 27646894  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
