

1759. Radiother Oncol. 2011 Jul;100(1):49-55. doi: 10.1016/j.radonc.2011.02.010. Epub
2011 Mar 21.

The influence of HPV-associated p16-expression on accelerated fractionated
radiotherapy in head and neck cancer: evaluation of the randomised DAHANCA 6&7
trial.

Lassen P(1), Eriksen JG, Krogdahl A, Therkildsen MH, Ulhøi BP, Overgaard M,
Specht L, Andersen E, Johansen J, Andersen LJ, Grau C, Overgaard J; Danish Head
and Neck Cancer Group (DAHANCA).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Clinical Oncology, Aarhus University Hospital,
Denmark. pernille@oncology.dk

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Tumour HPV-positivity is a favourable prognostic factor
in the radiotherapy of HNSCC, but the optimal radiotherapy regimen for
HPV-positive HNSCC is not yet defined. Reducing overall treatment time is known
to improve outcome in the radiotherapy of HNSCC as was also demonstrated in the
randomised DAHANCA 6&7 trial. We aimed to assess the influence of tumour
HPV-status, expressed by p16, on the response to accelerated fractionated
radiotherapy in HNSCC through evaluation of the DAHANCA 6&7 trial.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Immunohistochemical detection of HPV-associated
p16-expression was performed on FFPE-pre-treatment tumour-tissues from 794
patients enrolled in the DAHANCA 6&7 trial. The influence of tumour p16-status on
loco-regional tumour control and survival as a function of fractionation schedule
(5Fx/week vs 6Fx/week) was evaluated 5years after the completion of radiotherapy.
RESULTS: The significant and independent prognostic value of tumour
p16-positivity in HNSCC radiotherapy was confirmed, with adjusted hazard ratios
(HR) of 0.58 [0.43-0.78], 0.47 [0.33-0.67] and 0.54 [0.42-0.68] for loco-regional
control, disease-specific and overall survival, respectively. Accelerated
radiotherapy significantly improved loco-regional tumour control compared to
conventional radiotherapy, adjusted HR: 0.73 [0.59-0.92] and the benefit of the
6Fx/week regimen was observed both in p16-positive (HR: 0.56 [0.33-0.96]) as well
as in p16-negative tumours (HR: 0.77 [0.60-0.99]). Disease-specific survival was 
also significantly improved with accelerated radiotherapy in the group of
p16-positive tumours (adjusted HR: 0.43 [0.22-0.82]).
CONCLUSION: Accelerated radiotherapy significantly improves outcome in HNSCC
compared to conventional fractionation. The observed benefit is independent of
tumour p16-status and the use of a moderately accelerated radiotherapy regimen
seems advantageous also for HPV/p16-positive HNSCC.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.radonc.2011.02.010 
PMID: 21429609  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
