

176. Int J Cancer. 2012 Aug 1;131(3):E204-15. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27404. Epub 2012 Jan
11.

Sensitivity of cervical carcinoma cells to vesicular stomatitis virus-induced
oncolysis: potential role of human papilloma virus infection.

Le Boeuf F(1), Niknejad N, Wang J, Auer R, Weberpals JI, Bell JC, Dimitroulakos
J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Therapeutics, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada.

High-risk carcinogenic subtypes of human papilloma virus (HPV) are associated
with the development of squamous cell carcinomas of the cervix (CC) and a subset 
of head and neck (HNSCC). Recurrent metastatic diseases of these sites display a 
dismal prognosis. Therefore, there is an urgent need to uncover innovative
therapeutic strategies in this clinical setting. Oncolytic viruses, including
vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV), were identified due to their ability to
specifically target tumor cells that generally display defects in interferon
(IFN) signaling. HPV expressed proteins can inhibit IFN signaling; therefore,
HPV-infected cells may be particularly sensitive to VSV oncolysis. In this study,
we evaluated the sensitivity of four CC (HPV+) and four HNSCC (HPV-) derived cell
lines to VSV oncolysis. Interestingly, the CC cell lines were consistently more
sensitive to VSV cytotoxicity than the HNSCC cell lines tested. Exogenous IFN
addition or infection with two attenuated VSV variants that are more susceptible 
to IFN inhibition failed to attenuate VSV oncolysis in hypersensitive CC cell
lines. Furthermore, the expression of HPV-E6, that inhibits IFN receptor
signaling, in the VSV-resistant HNSCC cell line SCC25 attenuated VSV-induced IFN 
response and significantly enhanced VSV cytotoxicity. Finally, differential VSV
infection and replication was confirmed in xenograft murine tumor models and
explant tumor tissues from two patients with CC. Taken together, these results
demonstrate that HPV-infected cells are susceptible to oncolytic virus therapy
and that this approach may represent a novel therapeutic approach in HPV positive
CC and HNSCC patients.

Copyright Â© 2011 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.27404 
PMID: 22173567  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
