

1761. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2013 Oct;51(7):604-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bjoms.2013.03.015. Epub 2013 Apr 16.

Cannabinoid receptor-2 immunoreactivity is associated with survival in squamous
cell carcinoma of the head and neck.

Klein Nulent TJ(1), Van Diest PJ, van der Groep P, Leusink FK, Kruitwagen CL,
Koole R, Van Cann EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, University Medical Center
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The prediction of progression of individual tumours, prognosis, and survival in
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the head and neck is difficult. Cannabinoid-1
(CB1) and cannabinoid-2 (CB2) receptor expression is related to survival in
several types of cancer, and the aim of this study was to find out whether the
expression of CB1 and CB2 receptors is associated with survival in primary SCC of
the head and neck. We made immunohistochemical analyses of the cannabinoid
receptors on tissue arrays from 240 patients with the disease. Receptor
immunoreactivity was classified as none, weak, moderate, or strong staining.
Overall survival and disease-specific survival were plotted using Kaplan-Meier
survival curves. A multivariate Cox proportional hazard model was created with
all the relevant clinical and pathological features. Strong immunoreactivity of
the CB2 receptor was significantly associated with reduced disease-specific
survival (p=0.007). Cox-proportional hazard ratio (HR) showed that CB2 receptor
immunoreactivity contributed to the prediction of survival (HR 3.6, 95% CI
1.5-8.7, p=0.004). Depth of invasion (HR 2.2, 95% CI 1.2-4.2, p=0.01) and
vascular invasion (HR 2.5, 95% CI 1.4-4.5, p=0.001) were also associated with
survival.

Copyright Â© 2013 The British Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bjoms.2013.03.015 
PMID: 23601830  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
