

1765. Hum Pathol. 2017 May;63:184-189. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2017.02.021. Epub 2017
Mar 14.

RNA chromogenic in situ hybridization assay with clinical automated platform is a
sensitive method in detecting high-risk human papillomavirus in squamous cell
carcinoma.

Mendez-Pena JE(1), Sadow PM(1), Nose V(1), Hoang MP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
(2)Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA. Electronic address:
mhoang@mgh.harvard.edu.

Detection of active human papillomavirus (HPV) is clinically important because
its presence has been shown to correlate with favorable clinical outcomes and
better response to treatment in oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas. Using a
clinical automated platform, we compared the performance of commercially
available HPV DNA and RNA in situ hybridization (ISH) probes in archival tissues 
of 57 squamous cell carcinomas. Importantly, a clinical automated platform gives 
(1) consistent and reproducible results for HPV ISH and (2) better
standardization across clinical laboratories. Compared with polymerase chain
reaction results, RNA ISH exhibited 93% concordance versus 81% of DNA ISH. RNA
ISH was more sensitive than DNA ISH (100% versus 88%) and more specific (87%
versus 74%). When only accounting for 2+-3+ positivity, sensitivity was 92% for
RNA ISH versus 73% for DNA ISH, highlighting the ease of interpretation. p16
exhibited 96% sensitivity, whereas specificity was only 55%. In 3 cases, both RNA
and DNA ISH were positive, whereas polymerase chain reaction results were
negative, suggesting that ISH methods might be a more sensitive method.
Performing on a clinical automated platform, RNA ISH is sensitive in determining 
high-risk HPV status in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues and has the
potential of being a standalone clinical test.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2017.02.021 
PMID: 28302536  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
