

1769. Ann Oncol. 2012 Sep;23 Suppl 10:x178-85.

Locally advanced head and neck squamous cell cancer: treatment choice based on
risk factors and optimizing drug prescription.

Brana I(1), Siu LL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology and Hematology, Princess Margaret Hospital,
University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Despite the policy changes to decrease tobacco consumption and therapeutic
advances in this disease, squamous cell carcinomas arising from the head and neck
(HNSCC) continue to represent a common neoplasm and a leading cause of
cancer-related mortality in Europe and worldwide. although different approaches
have been evaluated, no treatment has currently been shown to be superior to
cisplatin (Platinol, Corden Pharma) based chemoradiation in locally advanced
HNSCC. Based on retrospective subgroup analyses from multiple large clinical
trials, human papillomavirus (HPV) status has been shown to be a validated
prognostic factor in oropharyngeal tumors. Patients with HPV-related tumors,
especially those who are non-smokers, have generally excellent outcome as their
tumors are highly sensitive to both chemotherapy and radiation, whereas those
with tobacco-related and HPV-negative tumors, who continue to represent
substantial number of cases in Europe, have worse prognosis with tumors that are 
more resistant to treatment. The goal of treatment de-intensification in patients
with favorable risk is to avoid long-term and late toxicity, but this must be
achieved without compromise of treatment efficacy. For those with risk factors
that portend a worse prognosis, the question remains whether addition to or
modification of conventional treatment regimens would improve upon therapeutic
index. Innovative clinical trial designs specifically tailored to these risk
groups are urgently needed.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mds322 
PMID: 22987958  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
