

1772. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 28;10(7):e0134160. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134160.
eCollection 2015.

Metachronous Second Primary Malignancies after Head and Neck Cancer in a Korean
Cohort (1993-2010).

Jung YS(1), Lim J(2), Jung KW(2), Ryu J(1), Won YJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Specific Organs Cancer Branch, Department of Otolaryngology, Center for
Thyroid Cancer, Research Institute and Hospital, National Cancer Center, Goyang, 
Korea.
(2)Cancer Registration and Statistics Branch, Division of Cancer Registration and
Surveillance, National Cancer Center, Goyang, Korea.

Second primary malignancy (SPM) is the major long-term cause of patient mortality
with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). As the incidence of high-risk
human papillomavirus (HPV)-related HNSCC is increasing globally, we analyzed the 
patterns of SPM occurrence, the effect of the index tumor site along with
attributes to HPV, and the effect of SPM on survival in South Korean patients
with head and neck cancer (HNC). Data were retrieved from the Korea Central
Cancer Registry, a nationwide population-based cancer registry, from 1993 to
2010. Standardized incidence ratios were analyzed and compared between index
tumor sites, particularly oropharyngeal vs. non-oropharyngeal sites. After
adjustment for competing risks, 3- and 5-year SPM rates were calculated using the
cumulative incidence function. The effects of SPM occurrence on overall survival 
(OS) were then analyzed. SPM rates were significantly lower for HPV-attributable 
oropharyngeal sites than for non-oropharyngeal sites, such as the larynx and
hypopharynx (p<0.001). SPM rates were also lower for oral cavity first primary
sites than for non-oropharyngeal first primary sites (p<0.001). SPMs typically
occurred in the esophagus, lungs and the head and neck. Uterine cervical cancers 
occurred significantly more frequently after index oropharyngeal cancer in women.
The 5-year and 10-year OS rates were 57.8 and 45.7% in all HNC patients,
respectively. The OS after SPM occurrence was poor (5-year, 31.8%; 10-year,
20.8%) compared to after index HNC occurrence (5-year, 68.4%; 10-year, 41.2%).
SPM occurrence in the esophagus and lung/bronchus showed a worse OS than SPM
localized to the head and neck. South Korean HNC patient, the first primary
cancer site affected SPM risk and distribution. The 5- and 10-year OS rates
deteriorated after SPM occurrence, particularly in the esophagus and lungs.
Further optimization of follow-up strategies for effective surveillance of SPM,
particularly in the esophagus and lungs, is warranted.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134160 
PMCID: PMC4517809
PMID: 26218068  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
