

1779. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2018 Jul 27;19(7):1793-1796.

Molecular Grading of Oral Squamous Cell Carcinomas Infected with EBV

Budhy TI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departement of Oral Pathology and Maxillofacial, Faculty of Dental Medicine,
Universitas Airlangga, Mayjen. Prof. Dr. Moestopo 47, Surabaya, Indonesia. Email:
theresia-i-b-s@fkg.unair.ac.id

Background: Squamous Cell Carcinoma (SCC) is a type of cancer that is often found
in oral cavity and areas of the head and neck. Viruses are major etiological
factors through production of factors that can disturb proliferation and
apoptosis regulators such as p53i, c-myc and bcl-2. This study aimed to determine
the molecular grading of oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCCs) infected with the
Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV). Methods: Twenty-seven OSCC patients underwent biopsy to
detect EBV infection through in situ hybridization for RNA EBV (EBER) and
immunohistochemical analysis of latent membrane protein-1 (LMP-1) and EBV nuclear
antigen-1 (EBNA-1). To assess molecular grades, cell proliferation and apoptosis 
regulator expression i.e. inactive p53 (p53i), c-myc and bcl-2, were
immunohistochemically analysed. Results: The cases were divided into two groups; 
infected and non-infected by EBV. Regression analysis showed that only EBNA-1
expression could affect p53i expression. Based on regression equations molecular 
grading of OSCCs infected by EBV was divided into three: Grade I (low), EBNA-1
expression was 7.60, and p53i expression was 9.74-17.5; Grade II (medium), EBNA-1
expression was 7.61-19.7, and p53i 17.5-30.1; Grade III (high), EBNA-1 expression
was 19.71, and p53i â‰¥ 30.1. Conclusion: In OSCC infected with EBV, only EBNA-1
expression can influence p53i expression

Creative Commons Attribution License

DOI: 10.22034/APJCP.2018.19.7.1793 
PMCID: PMC6165670
PMID: 30049189  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
