

178. Cancer Radiother. 2012 Feb;16(1):34-43. doi: 10.1016/j.canrad.2011.11.001. Epub
2012 Feb 6.

[High-risk human papilloma virus associated oropharynx squamous cell carcinomas: 
clinical, biological implications and therapeutical perspectives].

[Article in French]

Guihard S(1), Jung AC, Noël G.

Author information: 
(1)Département de radiothérapie, centre de lutte contre le cancer Paul-Strauss,
BP 42, 3, rue de la Porte-de-l'Hôpital, 67065 Strasbourg cedex, France.

The infection of the head and neck epithelium by high-risk human papillomaviruses
(HPV) is a risk factor for cancer onset and development. The incidence of
HPV-related head and neck squamous cell carcinoma is currently increasing. These 
lesions display distinct clinical features. HPV positive patients are often
younger and have a smaller history of tobacco smoking and alcohol drinking, but
have a history of virus-transmitting sex practices. HPV-related tumours are
mainly found in the oropharynx, are more associated to a local lymph node
invasion and display a poorly differentiated morphology. Despite these more
aggressive features, HPV-positive head and neck squamous cell carcinomas
correlate with an improved local control, disease-free and global survival. It is
thought that HPV-driven specific biologic abnormalities underlie higher tumour
sensitivity to chemotherapeutic drugs and ionizing radiations. The expression of 
the HPV E6 and E7 oncoproteins induce cell transformation by interfering with
cell signalling pathways involved in apoptosis, cell cycle, angiogenesis and
induce the overexpression of the CDKN2A gene. Therefore, alternative treatments
based on therapies targeting these pathways in combination with radiation dose
de-escalation could be proposed to HPV-positive patients, if they are properly
and reliably identified.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canrad.2011.11.001 
PMID: 22316562  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
