

1780. Head Neck Pathol. 2009 Sep;3(3):186-94. doi: 10.1007/s12105-009-0126-1. Epub 2009
Jul 11.

HPV-related nonkeratinizing squamous cell carcinoma of the oropharynx: utility of
microscopic features in predicting patient outcome.

Chernock RD(1), El-Mofty SK, Thorstad WL, Parvin CA, Lewis JS Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, 660 South Euclid, Campus Box 8118, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Human papilloma virus (HPV) is an etiologic agent in a subset of oropharyngeal
squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs). The aim of this study was to sub-classify SCC of
the oropharynx based upon histologic features into nonkeratinizing (NK) SCC,
keratinizing (K) SCC, and hybrid SCC, and determine the frequency of HPV and
patient survival in each group. Patients with oropharyngeal SCC with a minimum of
2 years of clinical follow-up were identified from radiation oncology databases
from 1997 to 2004. All patients received either up front surgery with
postoperative radiation or definitive radiation based therapy. In situ
hybridization (ISH) for high-risk HPV subtypes and immunohistochemistry for p16, 
a protein frequently up-regulated in HPV-associated carcinomas, were performed.
Overall and disease-specific survival were assessed. Of 118 cases, 46.6% were NK 
SCC, 24.6% K SCC and 28.8% hybrid SCC. NK SCC occurred in slightly younger
patients that were more often male. It more frequently presented with lymph node 
metastases and was surgically resected compared to K SCC. NK SCC was
significantly more likely to be HPV and p16 positive than KSCC (P < 0.001) and to
have better overall and disease-specific survival (P = 0.0002; P = 0.0142,
respectively). Hybrid SCC was also more likely than K SCC to be HPV and p16
positive (P = 0.003; P = 0.002, respectively) and to have better overall survival
(P = 0.0105). Sub-classification of oropharyngeal SCC by histologic type provides
useful clinical information. NK SCC histology strongly predicts HPV-association
and better patient survival compared to K SCC. Hybrid SCC appears to have an
intermediate frequency of HPV-association and patient survival.

DOI: 10.1007/s12105-009-0126-1 
PMCID: PMC2811624
PMID: 20596971  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
