

1782. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Mar 1;15(5):1779-86. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-1463.
Epub 2009 Feb 17.

Genetic signatures of HPV-related and unrelated oropharyngeal carcinoma and their
prognostic implications.

Klussmann JP(1), Mooren JJ, Lehnen M, Claessen SM, Stenner M, Huebbers CU,
Weissenborn SJ, Wedemeyer I, Preuss SF, Straetmans JM, Manni JJ, Hopman AH, Speel
EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Jean-Uhrmacher
Institute, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. peter.klussmann@uni-koeln.de

PURPOSE: Patients with human papillomavirus (HPV)-containing oropharyngeal
squamous cell carcinomas (OSCC) have a better prognosis than patients with
HPV-negative OSCC. This may be attributed to different genetic pathways promoting
cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We used comparative genomic hybridization to identify
critical genetic changes in 60 selected OSCC, 28 of which were associated with
HPV-16 as determined by HPV-specific PCR and fluorescence in situ hybridization
analysis and positive p16(INK4A) immunostaining. The results were correlated with
HPV status and clinical data from patients.
RESULTS: Two thirds of OSCC harbored gain at 3q26.3-qter irrespective of HPV
status. In HPV-negative tumors this alteration was associated with advanced tumor
stage (P=0.013). In comparison with HPV-related OSCC, the HPV-negative tumors
harbored: (a) a higher number of chromosomal alterations and amplifications
(P=0.03 and 0.039, respectively); (b) significantly more losses at 3p, 5q, 9p,
15q, and 18q, and gains/amplifications at 11q13 (P=0.002, 0.03; <0.001, 0.02,
0.004, and 0.001, respectively); and (c) less often 16q losses and Xp gains
(P=0.02 and 0.03). Survival analysis revealed a significantly better disease-free
survival for HPV-related OSCC (P=0.02), whereas chromosome amplification was an
unfavorable prognostic indicator for disease-free and overall survival (P=0.01
and 0.05, respectively). Interestingly, 16q loss, predominantly identified in
HPV-related OSCC, was a strong indicator of favorable outcome (overall survival, 
P=0.008; disease-free survival, P=0.01) and none of these patients had a tumor
recurrence.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic signatures of HPV-related and HPV-unrelated OSCC are
different and most likely underlie differences in tumor development and
progression. In addition, distinct chromosomal alterations have prognostic
significance.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-1463 
PMID: 19223504  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
