

1785. Cancer. 2013 Oct 1;119(19):3462-71. doi: 10.1002/cncr.28250. Epub 2013 Jul 16.

Long-term prognosis and risk factors among patients with HPV-associated
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma.

Lin BM(1), Wang H, D'Souza G, Zhang Z, Fakhry C, Joseph AW, Drake VE, Sanguineti 
G, Westra WH, Pai SI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland.

BACKGROUND: A subset of patients with human papillomavirus (HPV)-associated
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (HPV-OSCC) experience poor clinical
outcomes. The authors of this report explored prognostic risk factors for overall
survival (OS) and recurrence-free survival (RFS).
METHODS: Patients with incident HPV-OSCC who received treatment at the Johns
Hopkins Hospital between 1997 and 2008 and who had tissue available for HPV
testing as well as demographic and clinicopathologic information (N = 176) were
included. Tissue was tested for HPV by in situ hybridization (ISH) and/or p16
immunohistochemistry. Demographic and clinicopathologic information was extracted
from medical records.
RESULTS: In total, 157 of 176 patients (90%) with OSCC had HPV-associated disease
(HPV-OSCC). In the patients with HPV-OSCC, the 3-year and 5-year OS rates were
93% (95% confidence interval [CI], 88%-98%) and 89% (95% CI, 81%-97%),
respectively. Shorter survival was observed among older patients (hazard ratio
[HR], 2.33 per 10-year increase; 95% CI, 1.05-5.16 per 10-year increase;
P = .038), patients with advanced clinical T classification (HR, 5.78; 95% CI,
1.60-20.8; P = .007), and patients who were currently using tobacco (HR, 4.38;
95% CI, 1.07-18.0; P = .04). Disease recurrence was associated with advanced
clinical T-classification (HR, 8.32; 95% CI, 3.06-23; P < .0001), current/former 
alcohol use (HR, 13; 95% CI, 1.33-120; P = .03), and unmarried status (HR, 3.28; 
95% CI, 1.20-9.00; P = .02). Patients who remained recurrence free for 5 years
had an 8.6% chance of recurrence by 10 years (1-sided 95% CI upper bound, 19%;
P = .088).
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, prognostic risk factors were identified for patients 
with HPV-OSCC. The observed recurrence rates between 5 years and 10 years after
definitive therapy need to be validated in additional studies to determine
whether extended cancer surveillance is warranted in this cancer population.
Cancer 2013;119:3462-3471.. © 2013 American Cancer Society.

Copyright © 2013 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28250 
PMCID: PMC3788050
PMID: 23861037  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
