

1790. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2017 Feb 1;143(2):117-124. doi:
10.1001/jamaoto.2016.2784.

Sociodemographic Factors Associated With Knowledge and Risk Perception of Human
Papillomavirus and Human Papillomavirus-Associated Oropharyngeal Squamous Cell
Carcinoma Among a Predominantly Black Population.

Osazuwa-Peters N(1), Adjei Boakye E(2), Chen BY(3), Clancy J(3), Vallot PL(3), Su
JL(3), Beck GE(3), Varvares MA(4).

Author information: 
(1)St Louis University Cancer Center, St Louis, Missouri2Department of
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, School of Medicine, St Louis University, St
Louis, Missouri3Department of Epidemiology, College for Public Health and Social 
Justice, St Louis University, St Louis, Missouri.
(2)St Louis University Center for Outcomes Research (SLUCOR), St Louis, Missouri.
(3)currently medical students at St Louis University, School of Medicine, St
Louis, Missouri.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts Eye and
Ear Infirmary, Boston.

Importance: The incidence of human papillomavirus (HPV)-associated oropharyngeal 
squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) is increasing in the United States and may be
underestimated among black individuals. Characterizing the current knowledge
level among black individuals is critical to developing interventions to increase
awareness.
Objective: To describe the sociodemographic correlates of knowledge and risk
perception of HPV and HPV-associated OPSCC among a predominantly black
population.
Design, Setting, and Participants: A cross-sectional survey was conducted at a
drag racing event on September 12 and 13, 2015, in Madison, Illinois. The setting
was a community-based oral head and neck cancer screening and education
initiative. Participants were 301 drag race attendees 18 years or older who were 
conveniently sampled from attendees at an annual drag racing event predominantly 
patronized by black individuals.
Main Outcomes and Measures: The primary outcome was knowledge and risk perception
of HPV and HPV-associated OPSCC. An electronic-based questionnaire elicited
sociodemographic information and contained oral cancer knowledge and risk
perception items, which were combined to form knowledge and risk perception
scores. Multivariable linear regression analysis assessed estimates of knowledge 
and risk perception of HPV and HPV-associated OPSCC.
Results: Of the 301 participants (111 female and 190 male) completing the
questionnaire, 194 (64.5%) were black. Overall, respondents ranged in age from 18
to 78 years, with a mean (SD) age of 48.0 (13.0) years. The mean (SD) knowledge
score was 5.7 (4.6) of 15, and the mean (SD) risk perception score was 2.2 (1.4) 
of 6. Using multivariable linear regression, we found that, for every 1-year
increase in age, knowledge of HPV-associated OPSCC decreased by 5.0% and was
worse in men (β = -1.26; 95% CI, -2.33 to -0.18), black vs white individuals
(β = -1.29; 95% CI, -2.35 to -0.23), and those with a high school diploma or less
vs college graduates (β = -3.23; 95% CI, -4.67 to -1.80). Black individuals also 
had lower perceived risk of developing HPV-associated OPSCC (β = -0.36; 95% CI,
-0.69 to -0.02) compared with white individuals, and participants with a high
school diploma or less had lower perceived risk of developing HPV-associated
OPSCC compared with those with a college degree or higher (β = -0.59; 95% CI,
-1.04 to -0.14).
Conclusions and Relevance: Age and sex were independent correlates of knowledge
of HPV-associated OPSCC, while race and education level were correlates of both
knowledge and risk perception of HPV-associated OPSCC. These findings should
inform future interventions targeted at increasing knowledge of HPV-associated
OPSCC in black communities.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaoto.2016.2784 
PMID: 27711922  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
