

1792. Int J Cancer. 2013 Oct 15;133(8):1832-9. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28194. Epub 2013 May 2.

Markers of HPV infection and survival in patients with head and neck tumors.

Koslabova E(1), Hamsikova E, Salakova M, Klozar J, Foltynova E, Salkova E,
Rotnaglova E, Ludvikova V, Tachezy R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, First Faculty of 
Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Motol University Hospital, Prague, Czech 
Republic.

The purpose of this study was to determine whether changes in human
papillomavirus (HPV) DNA prevalence in oral rinses and/or HPV-specific antibody
levels in the sera of patients with oral/oropharyngeal cancer have prognostic
significance. One hundred and forty-two patients with oral/oropharyngeal tumors
were enrolled. The presence of HPV DNA was assayed in tumor tissue and oral
rinses and HPV-specific antibodies were assessed in the sera. Oral rinses were
collected before treatment and one year after the treatment. Sera were drawn
before treatment, one month, and one year after the end of the treatment.
Altogether, 59.2% of tumors were HPV positive. The presence of HPV DNA in the
tumors correlated with HPV DNA positivity in oral rinses and with HPV-specific
antibodies in the sera. Out of 66 patients with HPV-positive oral rinses at
enrolment, 84.8% became negative at one-year follow-up, while most patients
remained seropositive for HPV-specific antigens. However, the mean titers of
HPV16 E6 and/or E7 antibodies at follow-up were significantly lower. Of 16
patients with recurrences at follow-up (alive on second sampling), six were
positive at enrolment for HPV16 E6 and/or E7 antibodies. In five of these, no
decrease in antibody levels was observed. Titers of antibodies specific for HPV16
capsid antigens did not change during the follow-up. Our data suggest that the
detection of antibodies specific for the HPV 16 E6 and E7 oncoproteins may serve 
not only as a marker of HPV etiology, but also as a marker of recurrence and a
prognostic indicator in patients with HPV-positive tumors.

Copyright Â© 2013 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.28194 
PMID: 23564321  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
