

1798. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2013 Dec;17(6):547-51. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2013.09.001. 
Epub 2013 Oct 21.

A literature review on oral basaloid squamous cell carcinomas, with special
emphasis on etiology.

Jayasooriya PR(1), Tilakaratne WM, Mendis BR, Lombardi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology, Faculty of Dental Sciences, University of
Peradeniya, Peradeniya, Sri Lanka. Electronic address: primalij@yahoo.com.

In the recent years, basaloid squamous cell carcinomas (BSCCs) have gained
attention because of (1) observation of a relative increase in the number of
tumors arising particularly in head and neck sites, (2) identification of human
papillomavirus (HPV) in BSCCs arising predominantly in the oropharynx, and (3)
controversies that exist regarding the biological aggressiveness of the tumor.
The objective of the present review was to address the issues mentioned above by 
focusing primarily on oral BSCCs, using literature that has been published in the
English language up to 2013. According to the literature review, oral BSCCs were 
found to be relatively more common in elderly patients with a mean age of 64
years. A male predominance with a male/female ratio of 3:1 was observed. The
predominant site was the tongue, with almost half of the reported cases occurring
at this site, followed by the floor of the mouth and palate. With reference to
habit history, majority were found to be tobacco and alcohol users. However, only
3 studies revealed data on HPV status of purely oral BSCC, and according to the
results of these studies, of the 17 tumors tested, 4 had harbored high-risk HPV. 
Furthermore, most oral BSCCs were in an advanced clinical stage, namely, stage
III or IV with T3 or T4 lesions and cervical lymph node metastasis at initial
presentation, whereas 41% of patients had presented with local recurrences and
45% had died of the disease. In conclusion, although, the present literature
review found enough evidence to consider tobacco and alcohol as risk factors for 
the development of oral BSCC, steps should be taken to fill the gap in our
knowledge that exist with reference to contribution of oncoviruses, particularly 
HPV in the etiology of oral BSCC.

Â© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2013.09.001 
PMID: 24157420  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
