

1799. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2014 Aug;290(2):375-9. doi: 10.1007/s00404-014-3187-7. Epub 
2014 Mar 4.

HPV-related cervical disease and oropharyngeal cancer.

Lozza V(1), Pieralli A, Corioni S, Longinotti M, Bianchi C, Moncini D, Fallani
MG.

Author information: 
(1)Maternal and Child Department, Careggi University Hospital Florence, Largo
Brambilla 3, 50134, Florence, Italy, virginialozza@tin.it.

Human papillomavirus (HPV), especially HPV 16, is associated with the development
of both cervical and oral cancer. We show the case of a woman affected by
HPV-related cervical disease and oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC). A
41-year-old woman arrived at our Colposcopy Center following an abnormal Pap
smear result (ASC-H) and a diagnosis of moderate cervical dysplasia obtained by a
cervical biopsy. She underwent a colposcopy that showed a cervical abnormal
transformation zone grade 2. A laser conization was performed in November 2010.
Histology reported a moderate/severe dysplasia. The cone resection margins were
free. Follow-up colposcopy and cytology were negative. The HPV testing showed an 
infection by HPV 16. In October 2012, the patient presented to the Head-Neck ER
after episodes of hemoptysis; a lesion was found in the left tonsillar lodge. A
biopsy was performed with a result of squamous cell carcinoma with low-grade
differentiation. The HPV testing detected a high-risk HPV and the
immunohistochemical analysis was positive for p16. She was treated by
chemotherapy and brachytherapy. She was followed at the head-neck center with
monthly visits with oral visual inspection that showed complete absence of
mucosal abnormalities. HPV-related OPSCC and cervical precancerous/cancerous
lesions have significant similarities in terms of pathogenesis. They are both
caused largely by HPV 16, as in the present case. In conclusion, because of this 
association found in literature and in our case, we think that women with HPV
cervical lesions should have regular surveillance for oropharyngeal cancer,
whereas women with OPSCC should be encouraged to have diligent cervical
screening.

DOI: 10.1007/s00404-014-3187-7 
PMID: 24584479  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
