

180. Oral Oncol. 2012 Dec;48(12):1191-201. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2012.06.019.
Epub 2012 Jul 28.

Human papillomavirus related head and neck cancer survival: a systematic review
and meta-analysis.

O'Rorke MA(1), Ellison MV, Murray LJ, Moran M, James J, Anderson LA.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Epidemiology and Health Services Research Group, Centre for Public
Health, Queens University Belfast, Belfast, UK. m.ororke@qub.ac.uk

Human Papillomavirus (HPV) related oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas
(OPSCCs) are reported to have improved prognosis and survival in comparison to
other head and neck squamous cell cancers (HNSCCs). This systematic review and
meta-analysis examines survival differences in HPV-positive HNSCC and OPSCC
subtypes including tonsillar carcinoma in studies not previously investigated.
Four electronic databases were searched from their inception till April 2011. A
random effects meta-analysis was used to pool study estimates evaluating
disease-specific (death from HNSCC), overall (all-cause mortality),
progression-free and disease-free (recurrence free) survival outcomes in
HPV-positive vs. HPV-negative HNSCCs. All statistical tests were two-sided.
Forty-two studies were included. Patients with HPV-positive HNSCC had a 54%
better overall survival compared to HPV-negative patients HR 0.46 (95% CI
0.37-0.57); the pooled HR for tonsillar cancer and OPSCC was 0.50 (95% CI
0.33-0.77) and HR 0.47 (95% CI 0.35-0.62) respectively. The pooled HR for disease
specific survival was 0.28 (95% CI 0.19-0.40); similar effect sizes were found
irrespective of the adjustment for confounders, HPV detection methods or study
location. Both progression-free survival and disease-free survival were
significantly improved in HPV-positive HNSCCs. HPV-positive HNSCCs and OPSCCs
patients have a significantly lower disease specific mortality and are less
likely to experience progression or recurrence of their cancer than HPV-negative 
patients; findings which have connotations for treatment selection in these
patients.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2012.06.019 
PMID: 22841677  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
