

1800. Cancer. 2015 May 15;121(10):1599-607. doi: 10.1002/cncr.29251. Epub 2015 Jan 29.

Randomized trial comparing surgery and adjuvant radiotherapy versus concurrent
chemoradiotherapy in patients with advanced, nonmetastatic squamous cell
carcinoma of the head and neck: 10-year update and subset analysis.

Iyer NG(1), Tan DS, Tan VK, Wang W, Hwang J, Tan NC, Sivanandan R, Tan HK, Lim
WT, Ang MK, Wee J, Soo KC, Tan EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, National Cancer Centre, Singapore; Cancer
Therapeutics Research Laboratory, National Cancer Centre, Singapore.

Erratum in
    Cancer. 2015 Oct 1;121(19):3560.

BACKGROUND: The current study was performed to report the long-term results of a 
trial comparing concurrent chemotherapy and radiotherapy (CCRT) with surgery and 
adjuvant radiotherapy (RT) in patients with stage III/IV nonmetastatic head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma.
METHODS: Patients with stage III/IV resectable head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma were randomized to surgery followed by RT or CCRT. The trial was halted
prematurely due to poor accrual. Human papillomavirus status was tested on
archival material using polymerase chain reaction sequencing.
RESULTS: Of the total of 119 patients, 60 patients were randomized to primary
surgery (S arm) and 59 patients were randomized to CCRT (C arm). Human
papillomavirus status was tested in 75 patients, and only 3 were found to be
positive. The median follow-up for surviving patients was 13 years. Analysis of
the entire cohort demonstrated no statistically significant difference in overall
survival and disease-specific survival (DSS): 5-year rates were 45% versus 35%
for overall survival (P = .262) and 56% versus 46% for DSS (P = .637) for the S
arm and C arm, respectively. Analysis by subsites indicated that this difference 
favoring the S arm was mainly driven by survival data among patients with cancers
of the oral cavity and maxillary sinus. For patients with oral cavity cancer,
survival was significantly better in those who underwent primary surgery compared
with CCRT; the 5-year DSS rate was 68% versus 12% for the S arm and C arm,
respectively (P = .038). For patients with cancers of the maxillary sinus, the
5-year DSS rate was 71% for patients on the S arm and 0% for patients on the C
arm (P = .05).
CONCLUSIONS: These long-term results demonstrate a significant advantage for
primary surgery in patients with cancers of the oral cavity or maxillary sinus,
providing strong support for primary surgery as the main modality of treatment
for these subsites. In other subsites, CCRT and surgery with adjuvant RT were
found to demonstrate similar efficacy for survival in patients with advanced
resectable tumors.

© 2015 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29251 
PMID: 25639864  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
