

1804. Am J Dermatopathol. 2016 Nov;38(11):e154-e158.

Complete Spontaneous Regression of Merkel Cell Carcinoma After Biopsy: A Case
Report and Review of the Literature.

Ahmadi Moghaddam P(1), Cornejo KM, Hutchinson L, Tomaszewicz K, Dresser K, Deng
A, OÊ¼Donnell P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA.

Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is a rare primary cutaneous neuroendocrine tumor that
typically occurs on the head and neck of the elderly and follows an aggressive
clinical course. Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCPyV) has been identified in up to
80% of cases and has been shown to participate in MCC tumorigenesis. Complete
spontaneous regression of MCC has been rarely reported in the literature. We
describe a case of a 79-year-old man that presented with a rapidly growing, 3-cm 
mass on the left jaw. An incisional biopsy revealed MCC. Additional health issues
were discovered in the preoperative workup of this patient which delayed
treatment. One month after the biopsy, the lesion showed clinical regression in
the absence of treatment. Wide excision of the biopsy site with sentinel lymph
node dissection revealed no evidence of MCC 2 months later. The tumor cells in
the patient's biopsy specimen were negative for MCPyV by polymerase chain
reaction and immunohistochemistry (CM2B4 antibody, Santa Cruz, CA). The exact
mechanism for complete spontaneous regression in MCC is unknown. To our
knowledge, only 2 previous studies evaluated the presence of MCPyV by polymerase 
chain reaction in MCC with spontaneous regression. Whether the presence or
absence of MCPyV correlates with spontaneous regression warrants further
investigation.

DOI: 10.1097/DAD.0000000000000614 
PMID: 27759689  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
