

1807. Int J Oncol. 2012 Oct;41(4):1531-40. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1584. Epub 2012 Aug 7.

The NEDD8 conjugation pathway regulates p53 transcriptional activity and head and
neck cancer cell sensitivity to ionizing radiation.

Guihard S(1), Ramolu L, Macabre C, Wasylyk B, Noël G, Abecassis J, Jung AC.

Author information: 
(1)EA3430, Laboratory for Tumor Biology, Paul Strauss Cancer Center,
F-67065 Strasbourg Cedex, France.

Human papillomavirus (HPV)-related oropharyngeal cancer represents a distinct
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) subpopulation, with improved
disease-free and overall survival. In general, HPV-positive HNSCCs express
wild-type TP53, which could explain its increased radiosensitivity. However, the 
molecular mechanisms underlying this higher sensitivity remain elusive. We have
previously shown that HPV-related oropharyngeal carcinomas express decreased
levels of the NEDD8-activating enzyme 1/amyloid β precursor protein-binding
protein 1 (NAE1/APP-BP1) gene. NAE1/APP-BP1 function is required for the
NEDDylation of target proteins, and has been shown to be a negative regulator of 
p53 transcriptional activity. In this study, we addressed the hypothesis that
NAE1/APP-BP1 expression levels regulate p53 activity and cell survival upon
ionizing irradiation. We used the radiosensitive and naturally HPV16-infected
UPCI:SCC90 cell line and the radioresistant and HPV-negative SQ20B cell line as
the control. NAE1/APP-BP1 expression levels were modulated with expression
constructs and siRNAs. Radiosensitivity was evaluated with clonogenic survival
assays. p53 transcriptional activity was measured with a luciferase assay. The
overexpression of NAE1/APP-BP1 in UPCI:SCC90 cells resulted in the increased
NEDDylation of p53, inhibition of p53 activity and increased cell resistance to
ionizing radiation. Conversely, the inhibition of NAE1/APP-BP1 expression in
SQ20B cells induced p53-dependent cell death after treatment with X-rays. Taken
together, these results indicate that NAE1/APP-BP1 and NEDDylation are invovled
in modulating p53 activity and regulating its role in the response of cells to
ionizing radiation. Our findings bring new insights in the molecular mechanisms
underlying the increased radiosensitivity of HPV-related oropharyngeal tumors.
This is of importance, as no reliable and robust predictive biomarkers for tumor 
response to radiotherapy are currently available. These results also have
potential clinical significance, as drugs targeting NAE1/APP-BP1 have recently
emerged as a novel therapeutic modality in cancer treatment.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1584 
PMID: 22895816  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
