

181. Cancer. 2010 May 1;116(9):2166-73. doi: 10.1002/cncr.25033.

Comparison of human papillomavirus in situ hybridization and p16
immunohistochemistry in the detection of human papillomavirus-associated head and
neck cancer based on a prospective clinical experience.

Singhi AD(1), Westra WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, the Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore,
Maryland 21231-2410, USA.

BACKGROUND: Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a causative agent in a subset of head
and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs). These HPV-related cancers have a
clinicopathologic profile that diverges from HPV-negative HNSCCs. Accordingly,
HPV testing may soon become integrated into standard pathologic assessment of
HNSCCs.
METHODS: Data were prospectively collected for all patients with head and neck
carcinomas who had undergone HPV testing at the Johns Hopkins Hospital as part of
clinical care during a 57-month period. HPV testing consisted of concurrent HPV16
in situ hybridization (ISH) and p16 immunohistochemistry (IHC). Wide spectrum HPV
ISH was reserved for p16-positive cases that were HPV-16 negative.
RESULTS: HPV analysis was performed on 256 head and neck carcinomas in an effort 
to predict clinical outcomes (56%), localize primary tumor origin (21%),
establish tumor classification (9%), determine patient eligibility for vaccine
trials (8%), or satisfy patient curiosity (5%). A total of 182 (71%) tumors were 
HPV positive. HPV positivity correlated with oropharyngeal site (82% vs 9%) and
male sex (77% vs 48%). p16 positivity was present in all 176 HPV16-positive
cases, and in 19 of 80 (24%) cases that were HPV-16 negative. In 6 (32%)
discordant cases, p16 expression was because of the presence of another HPV type.
CONCLUSIONS: A feasible strategy that incorporates p16 IHC and HPV ISH is able to
detect HPV in a high percentage of oropharyngeal carcinomas. HPV status is
frequently requested by the oncologist to estimate clinical outcome, and used by 
pathologists to establish tumor classification and determine site of tumor
origin.

(c) 2010 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25033 
PMID: 20186832  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
