

1816. APMIS. 2015 Apr;123(4):305-14. doi: 10.1111/apm.12356.

Peripheral blood monocyte and T-lymphocyte activation levels at diagnosis predict
long-term survival in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma patients.

Aarstad HJ(1), Vintermyr OK, Ulvestad E, Aarstad HH, Kross KW, Heimdal JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University
of Bergen, Bergen, Norway; Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery,
Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.

This study was performed to determine whether peripheral blood (PB) monocyte
and/or lymphocyte activation at diagnosis were associated with long-term
prognosis in patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), and to 
what extent such prognostic properties relate to human papilloma virus
(HPV)-associated tumor infection of the included patients. This was a long-term
prospective study describing patient survival in relation to PB T lymphocyte and 
monocyte activation in patients observed for up to 14 years following diagnosis. 
Sixty-four patients from a consecutive cohort of newly diagnosed HNSCC patients
along with 16 non-cancer control patients were included over a period of almost 2
years. Monocyte responsiveness was assessed at diagnosis (N = 56 HNSCC/16
non-cancer controls) by measuring net levels of spontaneous vs
lipopolysaccharide-induced monocyte chemotactic protein (MCP)-1 secretion in
vitro. PB T lymphocyte activation was determined (N = 58 HNSCC/16 controls) by
measuring the percentage of T cells expressing CD69 by flow cytometry. Whether
HPV infection or not was determined by PCR analysis on formalin fixed
paraffin-embedded tumor tissue. Tumor HPV-positive patients had better prognosis 
than HPV-negative patients. A low net MCP-1 response in monocytes predicted
increased survival (Relative risk (RR) = 2.1; Confidence interval (CI): 1.1-4.0; 
p < 0.05). A low percentage of CD69 positive T lymphocytes also predicted better 
prognosis (RR = 2.6; CI: 1.3-5.0; p = 0.005). The predictive power of MCP-1
monocyte and CD69 T lymphocyte measures were retained when adjusted for age and
gender of the patients and shown to be independent of each other (N = 50 HNSCC/16
controls). The results were similar in HPV tumor-positive and -negative patients.
Patients with high monocyte- and/or T lymphocyte activation status had low
survival with 8% 5 year overall survival (OS) compared to 65% 5 year OS for
patients with dual low activation levels (RR = 0.27; CI: 0.14-0.56; p < 0.001),
mostly secondary to disease-specific survival. Both tumor HPV-positive and
-negative HNSCC patients with high percentage of CD69 positive T lymphocytes
and/or high monocyte MCP-1 secretion had low long-term survival. The data suggest
that the general inflammatory and adaptive immune systems are independently
linked to the clinical aggressiveness of both tumor HPV-negative and -positive
HNSCC patients.

Â© 2015 APMIS. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/apm.12356 
PMID: 25801083  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
