

1826. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Apr 1;18(7):2080-9. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-2181.
Epub 2012 Feb 7.

Phase I/II trial of carboplatin and paclitaxel chemotherapy in combination with
intravenous oncolytic reovirus in patients with advanced malignancies.

Karapanagiotou EM(1), Roulstone V, Twigger K, Ball M, Tanay M, Nutting C, Newbold
K, Gore ME, Larkin J, Syrigos KN, Coffey M, Thompson B, Mettinger K, Vile RG,
Pandha HS, Hall GD, Melcher AA, Chester J, Harrington KJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Cancer Research, Chester Beatty Laboratories, The Institute
of Cancer Research, 237 Fulham Road, London SW3 6JB, United Kingdom.

PURPOSE: Reovirus type 3 Dearing (RT3D) replicates preferentially in
Ras-activated cancers. RT3D shows synergistic in vitro cytotoxicity in
combination with platins and taxanes. The purpose of this phase I/II study was to
assess RT3D combined with carboplatin/paclitaxel in patients with advanced
cancers.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Patients were initially treated in a dose-escalating, phase 
I trial with intravenous RT3D days 1 to 5, carboplatin [area under curve (AUC) 5,
day 1] and paclitaxel (175 mg/m(2), day 1) 3-weekly. RT3D was escalated through
three dose levels: 3 × 10(9), 1 × 10(10), and 3 × 10(10) TCID(50) in cohorts of
three. Primary endpoints were to define the maximum tolerated dose and
dose-limiting toxicity and to recommend a dose for phase II studies. Secondary
endpoints included pharmacokinetics, immune response, and antitumor activity. A
subsequent phase II study using the 3 × 10(10) TCID(50) dose characterized the
response rate in patients with head and neck cancer.
RESULTS: Thirty-one heavily pretreated patients received study therapy. There
were no dose-limiting toxicities during dose-escalation and most toxicities were 
grade I/II. Overall effectiveness rates were as follows: one patient had a
complete response (3.8%), six patients (23.1%) had partial response, two patients
(7.6%) had major clinical responses clinically evaluated in radiation pretreated 
lesions which are not evaluable by Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors
(RECIST), nine patients (34.6%) had stable disease, and eight patients (30.8%)
had disease progression. Viral shedding was minimal and antiviral immune
responses were attenuated compared with previous single-agent data for RT3D.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of RT3D plus carboplatin/paclitaxel is well
tolerated with evidence of activity in cancer of the head and neck. A randomized 
phase III study is currently open for recruitment.

©2012 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-2181 
PMCID: PMC5553618
PMID: 22316603  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
