

1827. BMC Cancer. 2012 Jun 19;12:259. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-259.

Cyclin A1 shows age-related expression in benign tonsils, HPV16-dependent
overexpression in HNSCC and predicts lower recurrence rate in HNSCC independently
of HPV16.

Weiss D(1), Koopmann M, Basel T, Rudack C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital 
Münster, Kardinal-von-Galen Ring 10, 48149, Münster, Germany.
daniel.weiss@ukmuenster.de

BACKGROUND: Promoter methylation of the tumor suppressor gene Cyclin A1 could be 
associated with Human Papillomavirus 16 (HPV16) induced Head and Neck Squamous
Cell Carcinoma (HNSCC) and Cervical Carcinoma. There is disagreement about the
impact of this epigenetic event on protein expression of Cyclin A1 in malignant
and non-malignant tissue and there hardly exists any information about possible
relationships between Cyclin A1 expression and clinicopathological
characteristics in HNSCC.
METHODS: We analyzed protein expression of Cyclin A1 in 81 HNSCC and 74 benign
tonsils by immunohistochemistry and correlated it to Cyclin A1 methylation
status, presence of HPV16 infection and other clinicopathological
characteristics.
RESULTS: Overexpression of Cyclin A1 was more present in HNSCC than in tonsils
(p < 0.001). In both entities, HNSCC and benign tonsils, expression of Cyclin A1 
significantly correlated with the expression of Cyclin-dependent kinase-inhibitor
p16 (p = 0.000672 and 0.00495). In tonsils, expression of Cyclin A1 was inversely
proportional to age (p = 0.00000396), and further correlated with expression of
tumor suppressor gene p53 (p = 0.000228). In HNSCC Cyclin A1 expression was
associated with the presence of HPV16 DNA (p = 0.0014) and a lower recurrence
rate in univariate and multivariate analysis (p = 0.002 and 0.013). Neither in
HNSCC nor in tonsils Cyclin A1 expression correlated with promoter methylation.
CONCLUSIONS: Cyclin A1 is an important cell cycle regulator with age-related
increased expression in tonsils of children. HPV16 induces overexpression of
Cyclin A1 in HNSCC despite promoter methylation. Overexpression of Cyclin A1
predicts a lower recurrence rate in HNSCC independently of HPV16.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-259 
PMCID: PMC3404904
PMID: 22712549  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
