

1835. Mod Pathol. 2011 Oct;24(10):1295-305. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2011.91. Epub 2011
May 13.

A comparison of clinically utilized human papillomavirus detection methods in
head and neck cancer.

Schlecht NF(1), Brandwein-Gensler M, Nuovo GJ, Li M, Dunne A, Kawachi N, Smith
RV, Burk RD, Prystowsky MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Population Health, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA. nicolas.schlecht@einstein.yu.edu

Detection of human papillomavirus (HPV) in head and neck cancer has therapeutic
implications. In situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry for p16 are used by 
surgical pathologists. We compared the sensitivity and specificity of three
popular commercial tests for HPV detection in head and neck squamous cell
carcinomas with a 'gold standard' HPV PCR assay. A total of 110 prospectively
collected, formalin-fixed tumor specimens were compiled onto tissue microarrays
and tested for HPV DNA by in situ hybridization with two probe sets, a
biotinylated probe for high-risk (HR) HPV types 16/18 (Dako, CA, USA) and a probe
cocktail for 16/18, plus 10 additional HR types (Ventana, AZ, USA). The p16(INK4)
expression was also assessed using a Pharmingen immunohistochemistry antibody (BD
Biosciences, CA, USA). Tissue microarrays were stained and scored at expert
laboratories. HPV DNA was detected by MY09/11-PCR, using Gold AmpliTaq and
dot-blot hybridization on matched-fresh frozen specimens in a research
laboratory. HPV 16 E6 and E7-RNA expression was also measured using RT-PCR. Test 
performance was assessed by a receiver operating characteristic analysis. HR-HPV 
DNA types 16, 18 and 35 were detected by MY-PCR in 28% of tumors, with the
majority (97%) testing positive for type 16. Compared with MY-PCR, the
sensitivity and specificity for HR-HPV DNA detection with Dako in situ
hybridization was 21% (95% confidence interval (CI): 7-42) and 100% (95% CI:
93-100), respectively. Corresponding test results by Ventana in situ
hybridization were 59% (95% CI: 39-78) and 58% (95% CI: 45-71), respectively. The
p16 immunohistochemistry performed better overall than Dako (P=0.042) and Ventana
(P=0.055), with a sensitivity of 52% (95% CI: 32-71) and specificity of 93% (95% 
CI: 84-98). Compared with a gold standard HPV-PCR assay, HPV detection by in situ
hybridization was less accurate for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma on
tissue microarrays than p16 immunohistochemistry. Further testing is warranted
before these assays should be recommended for clinical HPV detection.

DOI: 10.1038/modpathol.2011.91 
PMCID: PMC3157570
PMID: 21572401  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
