

1837. Tumour Biol. 2010 Dec;31(6):659-66. doi: 10.1007/s13277-010-0083-z. Epub 2010 Jul
28.

A combination treatment with SAHA and ad-p63/p73 shows an enhanced anticancer
effect in HNSCC.

Shim SH(1), Lee CT, Lee JJ, Kim SY, Hah JH, Heo DS, Sung MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Tumor Biology, College of Medicine, Seoul National
University, Seoul, South Korea.

Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) is one of the most widely used histone
deacetylase inhibitors. However, the potential advantage of SAHA has not been
sufficiently validated as an adjunct to gene therapy of head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma (HNSCC). SAHA has been shown to boost the efficiency of gene
transfer by upregulating the expression of coxsackie adenoviral receptor on
treated cells. The p53 family genes, p63 and p73, have been shown to have
characteristics similar to p53, and although they are not confirmed as tumor
suppressors, DNA-damaging signals induce their overexpression. We previously
reported that the adenovirus-mediated transfer of p63 or p73 showed an effective 
cancer-killing effect similar to that of p53. In this study, we combined SAHA
with adenoviral delivery of p63 or p73 to enhance the efficiency of gene therapy.
This combination resulted in a significantly enhanced cancer-killing effect in
HNSCC cell lines but had no effect on normal human fibroblasts. SAHA treatment
added to ad-p63/p73 gene delivery caused an increase in p21 expression and
cleaved poly-ADP ribose polymerase. Our results indicate that adjuvant SAHA
treatment could be developed as a therapeutic strategy to enhance the efficiency 
of adenoviral gene transfer in the treatment of cancer.

DOI: 10.1007/s13277-010-0083-z 
PMID: 20665144  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
