

1838. Sex Transm Dis. 2014 Aug;41(8):486-92. doi: 10.1097/OLQ.0000000000000159.

Sexual behaviors and other risk factors for oral human papillomavirus infections 
in young women.

Cook RL(1), Thompson EL, Kelso NE, Friary J, Hosford J, Barkley P, Dodd VJ,
Abrahamsen M, Ajinkya S, Obesso PD, Rashid MH, Giuliano AR.

Author information: 
(1)From the *Departments of Epidemiology and †Medicine, ‡Student Healthcare
Center, §Department of Community Dentistry & Behavioral Science, and ¶Emerging
Pathogens Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL; and ∥Center for
Infection Research in Cancer (CIRC), Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL.

BACKGROUND: Oral human papillomavirus (HPV) is associated with a rising incidence
of certain head and neck cancers, and oral sex has been associated with oral HPV.
This study sought to identify more specific patterns of oral sexual activity,
including self-inoculation, that are associated with oral HPV infections in young
women.
METHODS: A total of 1010 women attending a large university completed a
computer-based questionnaire and provided oral specimens that were tested for any
oral HPV using a Linear Array assay that detects any HPV as well as 37 HPV
genotypes. Twenty-seven women provided additional samples up to 12 months after
enrollment. Bivariable and multivariable analyses were conducted to identify oral
sexual patterns and other risk factors associated with prevalent oral HPV.
RESULTS: Nineteen women had prevalent oral HPV (1.9%), with 10 women (1%) having 
a type-specific infection. Oral HPV was significantly associated with lifetime
coital sex partnership numbers (P = 0.03), lifetime and yearly oral sex
partnership numbers (P < 0.01), and hand and/or sex toy transfer from genitals to
mouth (P < 0.001). Oral HPV was also associated with greater use of alcohol,
cigarettes, marijuana, and sharing of smoking devices, lipstick, or toothbrushes 
(P < 0.05 for each), with an apparent dose-response for alcohol use and smoking
behavior, stratified by number of sexual partners. Of 7 women with prevalent HPV 
who provided follow-up samples, none had evidence of a persistent type-specific
infection.
CONCLUSIONS: These data provide additional evidence of transmission of oral HPV
from oral sexual activity and also suggest possible transmission from
self-inoculation or sharing of oral products.

DOI: 10.1097/OLQ.0000000000000159 
PMCID: PMC5528151
PMID: 25013976  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
