

184. J Virol. 2011 Feb;85(4):1645-54. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02093-10. Epub 2010 Dec 1.

Human papillomavirus type 16 (HPV-16) genomes integrated in head and neck cancers
and in HPV-16-immortalized human keratinocyte clones express chimeric virus-cell 
mRNAs similar to those found in cervical cancers.

Lace MJ(1), Anson JR, Klussmann JP, Wang DH, Smith EM, Haugen TH, Turek LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Iowa Roy J and Lucille A Carver College
ofMedicine, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.
michael-lace@uiowa.edu

Many human papillomavirus (HPV)-positive high-grade lesions and cancers of the
uterine cervix harbor integrated HPV genomes expressing the E6 and E7 oncogenes
from chimeric virus-cell mRNAs, but less is known about HPV integration in head
and neck cancer (HNC). Here we compared viral DNA status and E6-E7 mRNA sequences
in HPV-16-positive HNC tumors to those in independent human keratinocyte cell
clones derived from primary tonsillar or foreskin epithelia immortalized with
HPV-16 genomes. Three of nine HNC tumors and epithelial clones containing
unintegrated HPV-16 genomes expressed mRNAs spliced from HPV-16 SD880 to SA3358
and terminating at the viral early gene p(A) signal. In contrast, most integrated
HPV genomes in six HNCs and a set of 31 keratinocyte clones expressed HPV-16
major early promoter (MEP)-initiated mRNAs spliced from viral SD880 directly to
diverse cellular sequences, with a minority spliced to SA3358 followed by a
cellular DNA junction. Sequence analysis of chimeric virus-cell mRNAs from HNC
tumors and keratinocyte clones identified viral integration sites in a variety of
chromosomes, with some located in or near growth control genes, including the
c-myc protooncogene and the gene encoding FAP-1 phosphatase. Taken together,
these findings support the hypothesis that HPV integration in cancers is a
stochastic process resulting in clonal selection of aggressively expanding cells 
with altered gene expression of integrated HPV genomes and potential
perturbations of cellular genes at or near viral integration sites. Furthermore, 
our results demonstrate that this selection also takes place and can be studied
in primary human keratinocytes in culture.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02093-10 
PMCID: PMC3028875
PMID: 21123375  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
