

1847. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:430906. doi: 10.1155/2014/430906. Epub 2014 Mar 2.

Proteomic study of HPV-positive head and neck cancers: preliminary results.

Descamps G(1), Wattiez R(2), Saussez S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy,
University of Mons, Pentagone 2A, Avenue du Champ de Mars 6, 7000 Mons, Belgium.
(2)Laboratory of Proteomics and Microbiology, Faculty of Sciences, University of 
Mons, Mons, Belgium.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) was recently recognized as a new risk factor for head 
and neck squamous cell carcinoma. For oropharyngeal cancers, an HPV+ status is
associated with better prognosis in a subgroup of nonsmokers and nondrinkers.
However, HPV infection is also involved in the biology of head and neck carcinoma
(HNC) in patients with a history of tobacco use and/or alcohol consumption. Thus,
the involvement of HPV infection in HN carcinogenesis remains unclear, and
further studies are needed to identify and analyze HPV-specific pathways that are
involved in this process. Using a quantitative proteomics-based approach, we
compared the protein expression profiles of two HPV+ HNC cell lines and one HPV- 
HNC cell line. We identified 155 proteins that are differentially expressed (P < 
0.01) in these three lines. Among the identified proteins, prostate stem cell
antigen (PSCA) was upregulated and eukaryotic elongation factor 1 alpha (EEF1α)
was downregulated in the HPV+ cell lines. Immunofluorescence and western blotting
analyses confirmed these results. Moreover, PSCA and EEF1 α were differentially
expressed in two clinical series of 50 HPV+ and 50 HPV- oral cavity carcinomas.
Thus, our study reveals for the first time that PSCA and EEF1 α are associated
with the HPV-status, suggesting that these proteins could be involved in
HPV-associated carcinogenesis.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/430906 
PMCID: PMC3955617
PMID: 24719866  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
