

1853. J Immunol. 2016 Mar 15;196(6):2870-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1502027. Epub 2016
Feb 5.

Enhanced Cytotoxic CD8 T Cell Priming Using Dendritic Cell-Expressing Human
Papillomavirus-16 E6/E7-p16INK4 Fusion Protein with Sequenced Anti-Programmed
Death-1.

Garcia-Bates TM(1), Kim E(2), Concha-Benavente F(3), Trivedi S(4), Mailliard
RB(5), Gambotto A(2), Ferris RL(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15232; 
Department of Infectious Diseases and Microbiology, Graduate School of Public
Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15232;
(2)Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15232;
(3)Department of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15232; and.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15232;
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases and Microbiology, Graduate School of Public 
Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15232;
(6)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15232; 
Department of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15232; and
Cancer Immunology Program, University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, Pittsburgh,
PA 15213 ferrisrl@upmc.edu.

The incidence of human papillomavirus (HPV)-related head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma has increased in recent decades, though HPV prevention vaccines may
reduce this rise in the future. HPV-related cancers express the viral
oncoproteins E6 and E7. The latter inactivates the tumor suppressor protein
retinoblastoma (Rb), which leads to the overexpression of p16(INK4) protein,
providing unique Ags for therapeutic HPV-specific cancer vaccination. We
developed potential adenoviral vaccines that express a fusion protein of HPV-16
E6 and E7 (Ad.E6E7) alone or fused with p16 (Ad.E6E7p16) and also encoding an
anti-programmed death (PD)-1 Ab. Human monocyte-derived dendritic cells (DC)
transduced with Ad.E6E7 or Ad.E6E7p16 with or without Ad.αPD1 were used to
activate autologous CD8 CTL in vitro. CTL responses were tested against naturally
HPV-infected head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cells using IFN-γ ELISPOT and 
[(51)Cr]release assay. Surprisingly, stimulation and antitumor activity of CTL
were increased after incubation with Ad.E6E7p16-transduced DC (DC.E6E7p16)
compared with Ad.E6E7 (DC.E6E7), a result that may be due to an effect of p16 on 
cyclin-dependent kinase 4 levels and IL-12 secretion by DC. Moreover, the
beneficial effect was most prominent when anti-PD-1 was introduced during the
second round of stimulation (after initial priming). These data suggest that
careful sequencing of Ad.E6E7.p16 with Ad.αPD1 could improve antitumor immunity
against HPV-related tumors and that p16 may enhance the immunogenicity of DC,
through cyclin-dependent pathways, Th1 cytokine secretion, and by adding a
nonviral Ag highly overexpressed in HPV-induced cancers.

Copyright © 2016 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1502027 
PMCID: PMC4779745
PMID: 26851223  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
