

1855. J Int Assoc Physicians AIDS Care (Chic). 2010 Jan-Feb;9(1):10-4. doi:
10.1177/1545109709355709.

Post-ART epidermodysplasia verruciformis in a patient with AIDS.

da Silva LC(1), Miranda AE, Ferreira LC, da Silva RM Jr, Mira MT, Talhari C,
Talhari S.

Author information: 
(1)Enfermeira do Serviço de Assistência Especializada em DST/AIDS, Gerência de
Dermatologia e DST/AIDS, Fundação de Medicina Tropical do Amazonas (FMTAM),
Amazonas, Brazil.

Epidermodysplasia verruciformis (EV) is a rare disorder characterized by
persistent human papillomavirus (HPV) infection. Here, we describe a 48-year-old,
black, married male with AIDS, presenting a 1-year history of asymptomatic
hypopigmented lesions that appeared 3 years after antiretroviral therapy (ART)
initiation. Pre-ART, the initial CD4 count was 32 cells/mm(3) and the skin
lesions appeared when the CD4 count reached 122 cells/mm(3). Dermatological
examination demonstrated thin, scaly, slightly verrucous hypopigmented macules
and papules, isolated or presenting with a linear aspect (Köbner phenomenon) in
some areas, distributed on the neck, trunk, and superior and inferior members.
Skin biopsy of a macular lesion revealed epidermal acanthosis with vacuolated
keratinocytes presenting blue-gray pallor, arranged in clusters at the granular
and upper spinous layer. Immunohistochemistry revealed expression of p16( INK4a) 
with diffuse positivity in the upper third of the epithelium, corresponding to
the vacuolated keratinocytes. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was positive for
type 12 HPV, and a diagnosis of EV-like associated to AIDS was made. EV-like is a
rare disease and in this patent might be a manifestation of immune reconstitution
inflammatory syndrome.

DOI: 10.1177/1545109709355709 
PMID: 20071592  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
