

1858. Oncotarget. 2016 Dec 27;7(52):86730-86739. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.13502.

High-risk HPV genotypes and P16INK4a expression in a cohort of head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma patients in Singapore.

Tan LS(1), Fredrik P(2), Ker L(1), Yu FG(1), Wang Y(3), Goh BC(4), Loh KS(1)(3), 
Lim CM(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, National University Health
System Singapore, Singapore 119228.
(2)Department of Pathology, National University Health System Singapore,
Singapore 119228.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology, National University of Singapore, Singapore
119228.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, National University Health System Singapore,
Singapore 119228.

Human papillomavirus (HPV), especially HPV16 genotype, is associated with
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC). We aim to determine the prevalence
and characterize the high-risk (HR)-HPV genotypes in head and neck SCC (HNSCC) in
a South-East Asian multi-ethnic society in Singapore and examine its prognostic
significance.159 HNSCC archival tissue samples were retrieved and tumour DNA was 
screened for 18 HR-HPV genotypes using a PCR-based assay (Qiagen, digene HPV
genotyping RH test). P16 protein overexpression was identified using
immunohistochemistry (IHC). Statistical correlation between clinical outcomes
were performed between HPV-positive and negative HNSCC patients.Six HR-HPVs
(HPV16, 18, 31, 45, 56, 68) were detected in 90.6% of HNSCC; and 79.9% had
multiple HPV genotypes detected. HPV31 and HPV45 were the most prevalent (79.2%
and 87.4%, respectively); and HPV16 was predominantly found in OPSCC (p < 0.001).
HPV-DNA PCR assay yielded a high sensitivity (96%) but low specificity (11%) when
compared to p16 immunohistochemistry as the reference standard.P16-positive HNSCC
was predominantly observed in OPSCC (73.7%; p = 0.005); and p16-positive OPSCC
exhibited improved overall survival compared to p16-negative OPSCC (p = 0.022).
Similarly, smoking and alcohol consumption were poor prognostic factors of
overall survival (p = 0.007; p = 0.01) in OPSCC patients.HR-HPVs were identified 
in 90.6% of HNSCC patients using the HPV-DNA PCR assay. This test had a poor
specificity when compared to p16 IHC; making it an unreliable detection technique
in selecting patients for radiation dose de-escalation treatment protocol.
P16-positive tumor was predominantly found in the oropharynx these patients
demonstrated better overall survival than those with p16-negative OPSCC.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.13502 
PMCID: PMC5349949
PMID: 27893418  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
