

1862. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2014 Oct;203(4):897-903. doi: 10.2214/AJR.14.12497.

Prognostic value of FDG PET metabolic tumor volume in human
papillomavirus-positive stage III and IV oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma.

Alluri KC(1), Tahari AK, Wahl RL, Koch W, Chung CH, Subramaniam RM.

Author information: 
(1)1 Russell H. Morgan Department of Radiology and Radiological Sciences, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, 601 N Caroline St, JHOC 3235, Baltimore,
MD 21287.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to establish the prognostic utility in
human papillomavirus (HPV)-positive stage III and IV oropharyngeal squamous cell 
carcinoma (SCC) of the (18)F-FDG parameters maximal, mean, and peak standardized 
uptake value (SUVmax, SUVmean, and SUVpeak, respectively); metabolic tumor volume
(MTV); and total lesion glycolysis (TLG).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We included 70 patients in the present study who had a
biopsy-proven HPV-positive (by in situ hybridization) stage III and IV
oropharyngeal SCC and had a baseline PET/CT examination at our institution.
Outcome endpoint was event-free survival (EFS), which included recurrence-free
and overall survival. Cox proportional hazards multivariate regression analyses
were performed. Survival analysis was performed using Kaplan-Meier survival
curves.
RESULTS: In Cox regression proportional hazard univariate analysis, total MTV
(hazard ratio [HR], 1.02; p = 0.008), primary-tumor MTV (HR, 1.02; p = 0.024),
neck nodal MTV (HR, 1.03; p = 0.006), neck nodal TLG (HR, 1.01; p = 0.006), and
neck node status (HR, 4.45; p = 0.03) showed a statistically significant
association with EFS. There was no statistically significant association of EFS
with SUVmax, SUVmean, SUVpeak, and primary-tumor or overall TLG. In Cox
regression proportional hazard multivariate model I, total MTV remained an
independent prognostic marker for EFS when adjusted for every other variable
individually in the model; in model II, primary-tumor MTV, neck node status, and 
SUVpeak are independent prognostic markers for EFS. The Kaplan-Meier survival
curves using optimum cut point of 41 mL of total MTV were not significant (p =
0.09).
CONCLUSION: Total MTV and primary-tumor MTV are associated with survival outcomes
in patients with HPV-positive stage III and IV oropharyngeal SCC.

DOI: 10.2214/AJR.14.12497 
PMCID: PMC4332840
PMID: 25247958  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
