

1864. J Emerg Med. 2017 Jul;53(1):e19-e23. doi: 10.1016/j.jemermed.2017.03.020. Epub
2017 Apr 12.

Pediatric Acute Flaccid Paralysis: Enterovirus D68-Associated Anterior Myelitis.

Yoder JA(1), Lloyd M(2), Zabrocki L(3), Auten J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Naval Medical Center, Portsmouth, Virginia.
(2)School of Medicine, Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, Virginia.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Naval Medical Center, San Diego, California.

BACKGROUND: Enteroviral infections can cause acute flaccid paralysis secondary to
anterior myelitis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is important in the diagnosis
of this potentially devastating pediatric disease. Before the 2014 outbreak of
Enterovirus D68 (EV-D68), the virus was considered a relatively benign disease.
CASE REPORT: A fully immunized 8-year-old boy was brought to the emergency
department complaining of a cough, headache, neck pain, and right arm pain and
weakness. Deep tendon reflexes in the weak arm could not be elicited. MRI of the 
brain and cervical spine revealed anterior myelitis of the cervical spine. The
patient was given intravenous antibiotics, acyclovir, and methylprednisolone with
no initial improvement. He was then given intravenous immunoglobulin over 3 days 
with improvement in symptoms. Nasal swab polymerase chain reaction revealed
EV-D68. Despite medical management, the child was left with long-term motor
disability in the effected extremity. WHY SHOULD AN EMERGENCY PHYSICIAN BE AWARE 
OF THIS?: Acute flaccid paralysis is a potential devastating complication of
enteroviral infections. Extremity complaints in the clinical setting of central
nervous system infection should raise concern for encephalomyelitis. MRI is
extremely helpful in establishing this diagnosis. Prevalence of non-polio
enteroviral paralytic events is increasing in the United States. Potential EV-D68
cases should be reported to local health departments. Emergency medicine
providers should consider this complication in the child with acute, unexplained 
significant respiratory illness with new neurologic complaints.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jemermed.2017.03.020 
PMID: 28412073  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
