

1866. Head Neck. 2011 Jun;33(6):886-97. doi: 10.1002/hed.21557. Epub 2010 Nov 29.

Multiplexed immunobead-based profiling of cytokine markers for detection of
nasopharyngeal carcinoma and prognosis of patient survival.

Chang KP(1), Chang YT, Wu CC, Liu YL, Chen MC, Tsang NM, Hsu CL, Chang YS, Yu JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital
at Lin-Kou, Taiwan, Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study was to examine cytokine profiles of
peripheral blood for nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC).
METHODS: A total of 132 patients with untreated NPC, 169 healthy individuals, and
32 patients with chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) were enrolled in this study. The
plasma levels of 13 cytokines were measured by the multiplexed immunobead-based
method.
RESULTS: The levels of interleukin (IL)-6, IL-8, interferon-inducible protein 10 
(IP-10), tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF), and macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-3α were significantly elevated 
in patients with NPC; but the stem cell factor (SCF) levels were significantly
lower. The levels of IL-6, IL-8, IP-10, and MIP-3α were significantly elevated in
patients with advanced stages disease and correlated with Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV) DNA. A 2-marker panel consisting of MIP-3α and SCF increased the screening 
efficacy of EBV-specific viral capsid antigen (VCA) IgA or EBV DNA, although the 
addition of MIP-3α and SCF to the combined set of currently available markers
(EBV VCA IgA and EBV DNA) did not improve the accuracy of the diagnostic panel.
The patients with NPC with higher levels of IL-8, VEGF, MIP-3α, and EBV DNA had
worse prognoses for overall survival (p = .008, .035, .005, and .007,
respectively).
CONCLUSION: Simultaneous, large-scale measurement of multiple cytokines may
improve NPC detection and prognostic prediction.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hed.21557 
PMID: 21560180  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
