

1867. Zhonghua Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2010 Mar;45(3):238-43.

[Transporter associated with antigen processing 1 637A/G gene polymorphisms and
susceptibility to nasopharyngeal carcinoma in Han population in Yunnan Province, 
China].

[Article in Chinese]

Sui J(1), Mo Q, Li XJ, Ma J, Ren YX, Gao W, Wang H, Yang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, The Third Affilliated Hospital of Kunming
Medical College, Kunming 650118, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the relationship between 637A/G gene polymorphisms of the
transporter associated with antigen processing 1 gene and nasopharyngeal
carcinomas (NPC) and to find out the susceptible genes of NPC in Han population
in Yunnan Province, China.
METHODS: Two hundred and thirty-three cases with NPC and 296 cases matched
cancer-free controls were genotyped for the TAP1 637A/G polymorphism by
polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP).
Epstein-Barr virus infection was detected by PCR. The adjusted odds ratios (OR)
and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated by using unconditional logistic
regression model.
RESULTS: Contrast with homozygous TAP1 637 AA, G allele significantly increasing 
risk of NPC was associated with homozygous 637 GG OR = 4.26 (95%CI were 2.08 -
8.66, P < 0.001) and heterozygous 637 AG OR = 1.56 (95%CI were 1.12 - 2.33, P <
0.05). The subjects at least having one TAP1 637 G allele had OR of 1.88 (95%CI
were 1.35 - 2.82, P < 0.001). Furthermore, EBV infection may increase the risk of
developing NPC interacting with TAP1 637 A/G polymorphism OR = 2.76(95% CI were
1.69 - 4.63, P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: The TAP1 637G allele is associated with the NPC in Han population in
Yunnan China, EBV pathogenesis in NPC might be facilitated by polymorphisms in
the TAP1 proteins.


PMID: 20450707  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
