

1869. World J Gastroenterol. 2013 Oct 21;19(39):6598-603. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v19.i39.6598.

No evidence of HPV DNA in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma in a population of
Southern Brazil.

Antunes LC(1), Prolla JC, de Barros Lopes A, da Rocha MP, Fagundes RB.

Author information: 
(1)Luís Carlos Moreira Antunes, João Carlos Prolla, Antonio de Barros Lopes,
Renato Borges Fagundes, Programa de Pós-Graduação: Ciências em Gastroenterologia 
e Hepatologia - Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Rio
Grande do Sul 90035-003, Brasil.

AIM: To investigate the association between human papillomavirus (HPV) and
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) in southern Brazil.
METHODS: We studied 189 esophageal samples from 125 patients from three different
groups: (1) 102 biopsies from 51 patients with ESCC, with one sample from the
tumor and another from normal esophageal mucosa distant from the tumor; (2) 50
esophageal biopsies from 37 patients with a previous diagnosis of head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC); and (3) 37 biopsies from esophageal mucosa with 
normal appearance from 37 dyspeptic patients, not exposed to smoking or alcohol
consumption. Nested-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with the MY09/11 and GP5/6 L1
primers was used to detect HPV L1 in samples fixed in formalin and stored in
paraffin blocks. All PCR reactions were performed with a positive control
(cervicovaginal samples), with a negative control (Human Genomic DNA) and with a 
blank reaction containing all reagents except DNA. We took extreme care to
prevent DNA contamination in sample collection, processing, and testing.
RESULTS: The histological biopsies confirmed the diagnosis of ESCC in 52 samples 
(51 from ESCC group and 1 from the HNSCC group) and classified as well
differentiated (12/52, 23.1%), moderately differentiated (27/52, 51.9%) or poorly
differentiated (7/52, 13.5%). One hundred twenty-eight esophageal biopsies were
considered normal (51 from the ESCC group, 42 from the HNSCC group and 35 from
dyspeptic patients). Nine had esophagitis (7 from the HNSCC and 2 from dyspeptic 
patients). Of a total of 189 samples, only 6 samples had insufficient material
for PCR analysis: 1 from mucosa distant from the tumor in a patient with ESCC, 3 
from patients with HNSCC and 2 from patients without cancer. In 183 samples
(96.8%) GAPDH, G3PDH and/or β-globin were amplified, thus indicating the adequacy
of the DNA in those samples. HPV DNA was negative in all the 183 samples tested: 
52 with ESCC, 9 with esophagitis and 122 with normal esophageal mucosa.
CONCLUSION: There was no evidence of HPV infection in different ESCC from
southern Brazil.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v19.i39.6598 
PMCID: PMC3801374
PMID: 24151387  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
