

187. Biomolecules. 2016 Nov 24;6(4). pii: E46.

Epigenetic Impact on EBV Associated B-Cell Lymphomagenesis.

Ghosh Roy S(1), Robertson ES(2), Saha A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Presidency University, 86/1, College Street,
Kolkata 700073, West Bengal, India. shatadru54@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, and the Tumor
Virology Program, Abramson Comprehensive Cancer Center, Perelman School of
Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
erle@upenn.edu.
(3)Department of Life Sciences, Presidency University, 86/1, College Street,
Kolkata 700073, West Bengal, India. abhik.dbs@presiuniv.ac.in.

Epigenetic modifications leading to either transcriptional repression or
activation, play an indispensable role in the development of human cancers.
Epidemiological study revealed that approximately 20% of all human cancers are
associated with tumor viruses. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), the first human tumor
virus, demonstrates frequent epigenetic alterations on both viral and host
genomes in associated cancers-both of epithelial and lymphoid origin. The cell
type-dependent different EBV latent gene expression patterns appear to be
determined by the cellular epigenetic machinery and similarly viral oncoproteins 
recruit epigenetic regulators in order to deregulate the cellular gene expression
profile resulting in several human cancers. This review elucidates the epigenetic
consequences of EBV-host interactions during development of multiple EBV-induced 
B-cell lymphomas, which may lead to the discovery of novel therapeutic
interventions against EBV-associated B-cell lymphomas by alteration of reversible
patho-epigenetic markings.

DOI: 10.3390/biom6040046 
PMCID: PMC5197956
PMID: 27886133  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
