

1870. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Mar;36(3):321-30. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31823f2f17.

HPV-associated neuroendocrine carcinoma of the oropharynx: a rare new entity with
potentially aggressive clinical behavior.

Kraft S(1), Faquin WC, Krane JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. jkrane@partners.org

High-grade neuroendocrine carcinoma of the head and neck is an aggressive
neoplasm which rarely arises in the oropharynx. Here we report a series of 8
oropharyngeal neuroendocrine carcinomas associated with both human papillomavirus
(HPV) infection and tobacco exposure. The tumor occurred predominantly in male
patients (6 of 8) at a mean age of 59 years. Histologically, these cases were all
classified as poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma (small cell
carcinoma) with high mitotic activity [mean 53.3 mitoses per 10 HPF], necrosis,
high nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratio, and nuclear molding. One case also exhibited a
moderately differentiated component, and one other case had a component of
squamous cell carcinoma with basaloid features. Neuroendocrine differentiation
was confirmed by immunoreactivity for synaptophysin and/or chromogranin A in all 
cases. P63 staining was negative, except in 1 case. Seven of the 8 cases showed
strong and diffuse p16 expression, a surrogate marker for high-risk HPV
infection. HPV infection was confirmed in 6 of these 7 cases by HPV in situ
hybridization and/or polymerase chain reaction analysis. HPV subtypes 16, 18, and
33 were identified in 1 case each by polymerase chain reaction testing. Six of
the 7 patients for whom clinical history was available presented with advanced
disease (4 with regional lymph node metastases, 1 with distant metastases, and 1 
with distant and locoregional metastases). Disease recurred in 5 of the 6
patients with available clinical follow-up, with 3 developing distant metastases 
to brain, bones, lung, pleura, adrenal glands, and pancreas. These 3 cases were
all from the HPV-positive group. In summary, neuroendocrine carcinoma of the
oropharynx represents a rare novel HPV-associated entity with high-grade
histologic features and aggressive clinical behavior.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31823f2f17 
PMID: 22301491  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
