

1878. PLoS One. 2016 Dec 5;11(12):e0167665. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0167665.
eCollection 2016.

Impact of Sonic Hedgehog Pathway Expression on Outcome in HPV Negative Head and
Neck Carcinoma Patients after Surgery and Adjuvant Radiotherapy.

Enzenhofer E(1), Parzefall T(1), Haymerle G(1), Schneider S(1), Kadletz L(1),
Heiduschka G(1), Pammer J(2), Oberndorfer F(2), Wrba F(2), Loader B(3), Grasl
MC(1), Perisanidis C(4), Erovic BM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Medical University
of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Department of Clinical Pathology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Rudolfstiftung,
Vienna, Austria.
(4)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Medical University of Vienna,
Vienna, Austria.

INTRODUCTION: HPV positive patients suffering from head and neck cancer benefit
from intensified radiotherapy when applied as a primary as well as an adjuvant
treatment strategy. However, HPV negative patients treated with surgery and
adjuvant radiotherapy lack validated prognostic biomarkers. It is therefore
important to define prognostic biomarkers in this particular patient population. 
Especially, ´high-risk groups´ need to be defined in order to adapt treatment
protocols. Since dysregulation of the sonic hedgehog pathway plays an important
role in carcinogenesis, we aimed to assess whether members of the sonic
hedgehog-signaling pathway may act as prognostic factors in patients with HPV
negative head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this prospective study, pretreatment tumor biopsies of 
patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma were taken during
panendoscopy (2005 to 2008). All patients were treated with surgery and
postoperative radiotherapy. After assessment of HPV and p16 status, protein
expression profiles of the Sonic hedgehog-signaling pathway were determined by
immunohistochemistry and tissue microarray analyses in 36 HPV negative tumor
biopsies. Expression profiles of Sonic hedgehog, Indian hedgehog, Patched,
Smoothened, Gli-1, Gli-2 and Gli-3 were correlated with patients´ clinical data, 
local-control rate, disease-free as well as overall survival. Data from The
Cancer Genome Atlas databank were used for external validation of our results.
RESULTS: Gli-1 (p = 0.04) and Gli-2 (p = 0.02) overexpression was significantly
linked to improved overall survival of HPV negative patients. Gli-2 (p = 0.04)
overexpression correlated significantly with prolonged disease-free survival.
Cox-multivariate analysis showed that overexpression of Gli-2 correlated
independently (HR 0.40, 95% CI 0.16-0.95, p = 0.03) with increased overall
survival.
DISCUSSION: Gli-1 and Gli-2 overexpression represents a substantial prognostic
factor for overall and disease-free survival in patients with locally advanced
HPV negative head and neck cancer undergoing surgery and postoperative
radiotherapy.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0167665 
PMCID: PMC5137890
PMID: 27918595  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
