
Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


1879. J Voice. 2011 Nov;25(6):770-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jvoice.2010.09.007. Epub 2011 Jan
12.

Is human papillomavirus a causative factor of glottic cancer?

Lee SY(1), Cho NH, Choi EC, Kim WS, Kim SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Chung-Ang University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea.

Comment in
    J Voice. 2012 Sep;26(5):676.e21; author reply 676.e23.

OBJECTIVES: Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is controversial as a causative 
factor of head and neck cancers despite the relatively high frequency of HPV
infection in extragenital organ cancers. We aimed to clarify whether HPV directly
affects the oncogenesis and biologic behavior of glottis cancer (GC).
METHODS: Paraffin block was obtained from 95 patients who were diagnosed as GC
and 15 normal controls. HPV genotyping chip, real-time polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) was used for identification of prevalence, phenotype, and physical status
of HPV. We compared results with the clinicopathological parameters of GC
patients.
RESULTS: HPV was detected in 7.4% (7 of 95) of GC patients, whereas 0% (0 of 15) 
of controls. Of the HPV-positive tumors in GCs, HPV-16 was the single most common
type and HPV-16 prevalence rate was 57.1% (4 of 7). Among the HPV-16 infected
GCs, integration of HPV-16 was found only in one case (1 of 4). There was no
significant difference in HPV prevalence between GC and controls and HPV had no
significant relation with any clinicopathologic parameters of GC patients.
CONCLUSION: HPV infection may not be a causative factor in the oncogenesis and
biologic behavior of GC.

Copyright Â© 2011 The Voice Foundation. Published by Mosby, Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jvoice.2010.09.007 
PMID: 21227643  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
