
Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to
disclose.


1881. Auris Nasus Larynx. 2012 Apr;39(2):137-44. doi: 10.1016/j.anl.2011.02.012. Epub
2011 May 17.

Current understanding and management of nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Yoshizaki T(1), Ito M, Murono S, Wakisaka N, Kondo S, Endo K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Graduate School of Medical
Science, Kanazawa University, 13-1 Takaramachi, Kanazawa, Japan.
tomoy@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a kind of rare head and neck cancer in Japan.
However, NPC has some unique features. It is one of the most popular cancers in
southern China, Southeast Asia, the Arctic, and the middle East/north Africa.
This distinctive racial, ethnical, and geographic predisposition to NPC implies
that both genetic susceptibility and environmental factors contribute to the
development of this tumor. NPC is an Epstein-Barr virus - associated tumor.
Consistent elevation of EBV antibody titers is a well-established risk factor of 
development of NPC. Not only pathophysiological relationship, but also molecular 
mechanism of EBV-mediated carcinogenesis has been enthusiastically investigated. 
LMP1, an EBV primary oncogene, upregulates each step of metastasis, and
contribute to highly metastatic feature of NPC. A tumor suppressor gene p53 is
mostly intact and overexpressed in NPC whereas expression of p16, a
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitory protein, is downregulated in 2/3 of NPC.
Intention modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) is now getting prevalent for the
treatment of NPC because of complicated structure and location of nasopharynx. A 
good therapeutic result can be achieved by distributing a high dose to the tumor 
while keeping down normal tissue complications by reducing radiation dose to
normal tissues. Chemotherapy is important to control distant metastasis of
chemoradiosensitive NPC, and thus, should play an important role. However, most
effective combination of anti-tumor drugs, protocol of chemoradiotherapy has not 
well-established. Finally, molecular targeting therapy, including targeting EBV
gene product, has been developing and on the way to the clinical use.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anl.2011.02.012 
PMID: 21592702  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
