

1890. J Am Dent Assoc. 2011 Aug;142(8):915-24.

The connection between human papillomavirus and oropharyngeal squamous cell
carcinomas in the United States: implications for dentistry.

Cleveland JL(1), Junger ML, Saraiya M, Markowitz LE, Dunne EF, Epstein JB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oral Health, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and
Health Promotion, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, MS F-10, 4770
Buford Highway, Atlanta, Ga. 30341, USA. JLCleveland@cdc.gov

Erratum in
    J Am Dent Assoc. 2011 Sep;142(9):1005-6.

Comment in
    J Am Dent Assoc. 2012 May;143(5):440.
    J Am Dent Assoc. 2011 Nov;142(11):1237-8.

BACKGROUND: Results from studies conducted in the past several years suggest that
some oropharyngeal cancers, those of the base of the tongue and the tonsils, are 
associated with high-risk types of human papillomavirus (HPV). In this article,
the authors summarize the available evidence regarding the epidemiology of
HPV-associated oropharyngeal cancers in the United States, the available HPV
vaccines and the implications of these for dentistry. They also examine the
differences in HPV prevalence between cancers of the oral cavity and those of the
oropharynx.
TYPES OF STUDIES REVIEWED: The authors searched PubMed, Web of Science, The
Cochrane Library and the National Guideline Clearinghouse to identify
English-language systematic reviews and meta-analyses focused on HPV-associated
oropharyngeal squamous cell cancers published from January 2005 through May 2011.
RESULTS: Molecular and epidemiologic evidence suggest a strong etiologic
association of HPV with oropharyngeal cancers. The incidence of oropharyngeal
cancers in the United States has increased between 1973 and 2007, whereas that of
cancers at other head and neck sites has decreased steadily. Compared with
HPV-negative cancers, HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancers are associated with
certain sexual behaviors, occur more often among white men and people who do not 
use tobacco or alcohol, and may occur in a population younger by about four years
(median ages, 52-56 years). Despite often having a later stage of diagnosis,
people with HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancers have a lower risk of dying or
recurrence than do those with HPV-negative cancers. The effectiveness of the HPV 
vaccine in preventing oropharyngeal cancers is unknown.
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: Dental health care personnel (DHCP) should be
knowledgeable about the role of HPV in carcinogenesis, the association of HPV
with oropharyngeal cancers and HPV vaccines, and they should be prompt in
referring patients with suggestive symptoms for evaluation. DHCP can play an
important role in increasing patients' knowledge about HPV and oropharyngeal
cancers.

Copyright Â© 2011 American Dental Association. All rights reserved.


PMID: 21804058  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
