

1891. PLoS One. 2013 May 10;8(5):e63440. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063440. Print 2013.

Overexpression of EGFR in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma is associated
with inactivation of SH3GL2 and CDC25A genes.

Maiti GP(1), Mondal P, Mukherjee N, Ghosh A, Ghosh S, Dey S, Chakrabarty J, Roy
A, Biswas J, Roychoudhury S, Panda CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncogene Regulation, Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute,
Kolkata, India.

The aim of this study is to understand the mechanism of EGFR overexpression in
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). For this reason,
expression/mutation of EGFR were analyzed in 30 dysplastic head and neck lesions 
and 148 HNSCC samples of Indian patients along with 3 HNSCC cell lines. In
addition, deletion/methylation/mutation/expression of SH3GL2 (associated with
EGFR degradation) and CDC25A (associated with dephosphorylation of EGFR) were
analyzed in the same set of samples. Our study revealed high frequency of EGFR
overexpression (66-84%), low frequency of gene amplification (10-32.5%) and
absence of functional mutation in the dysplastic lesions and HNSCC samples. No
correlation was found between protein overexpression and mRNA expression/gene
amplification status of EGFR. On the other hand, frequent alterations
(deletion/methylation) of SH3GL2 (63-77%) and CDC25A (37-64%) were seen in the
dysplastic and HNSCC samples. Two novel single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs)
were found in the promoter region of SH3GL2. Reduced expression of these genes
showed concordance with their alterations. Overexpression of EGFR and p-EGFR were
significantly associated with reduced expression and alterations of SH3GL2 and
CDC25A respectively. In-vitro demethylation experiment by 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine 
(5-aza-dC) showed upregulation of SH3GL2 and CDC25A and downregulation of EGFR
expression in Hep2 cell line. Poor patient outcome was predicted in the cases
with alterations of SH3GL2 and CDC25A in presence of human papilloma virus (HPV) 
infection. Also, low SH3GL2 and high EGFR expression was a predictor of poor
patient survival. Thus, our data suggests that overexpression of EGFR due to its 
reduced degradation and dephosphorylation is needed for development of HNSCC.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063440 
PMCID: PMC3651136
PMID: 23675485  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
