

1894. J Oral Pathol Med. 2017 Mar;46(3):208-213. doi: 10.1111/jop.12478. Epub 2016 Jul 
21.

Combined CD44, c-MET, and EGFR expression in p16-positive and p16-negative head
and neck squamous cell carcinomas.

Baschnagel AM(1), Tonlaar N(2), Eskandari M(3), Kumar T(3), Williams L(3), Hanna 
A(2), Pruetz BL(4), Wilson GD(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Oncology, University of Wisconsin Carbone Cancer Center,
School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, William Beaumont Hospital, Royal Oak, MI,
USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, William Beaumont Hospital, Royal Oak, MI, USA.
(4)Beaumont BioBank, William Beaumont Hospital, Royal Oak, MI, USA.

PURPOSE/OBJECTIVE(S): To examine the association between CD44 and c-MET
expression in relation to p16 and EGFR in patients with head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma (HNSCC).
MATERIALS/METHODS: Immunohistochemical staining of CD44, p16, EGFR, and c-MET was
performed on 105 locally advanced HNSCC patients treated with chemoradiation.
CD44 expression was correlated with c-MET, EGFR, and p16, locoregional control
(LRC), distant metastases (DM), disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival 
(OS).
RESULTS: High CD44 expression was present in 33% of patients and was associated
with non-oropharynx primaries (P < 0.001), high c-MET expression (P < 0.001),
p16-negative (P < 0.001) and EGFR-positive tumors (P < 0.001). Fifty-seven
percent of CD44 high expressing tumors had high c-MET expression compared to 21% 
of CD44 low expressing tumors (P < 0.001). High CD44 expression predicted for
worse LRC (HR: 2.44; 95% CI: 1.16-5.13; P = 0.018), DFS (HR: 2.61; 95% CI:
1.46-4.67; P = 0.001), and OS (HR: 2.52; 95% CI: 1.30-4.92; P = 0.007) but not DM
(P = 0.57) on univariate analysis. Patients with both high CD44 and c-MET
expression had a poor prognosis with a 2-year DFS of 30% compared to 70% in the
rest of the cohort (P = 0.003). On multivariable analysis, after adjusting for
site, T-stage, smoking history, and EGFR status, high c-MET (P = 0.039) and
negative p16 status (P = 0.034) predicted for worse DFS, while high CD44
expression did not (P = 0.43).
CONCLUSIONS: High CD44 expression is associated with high c-MET expression,
p16-negative tumors, and EGFR-positive tumors. The combination of these markers
predicts for poor prognosis in HNSCC patients treated with chemoradiation.

Â© 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jop.12478 
PMID: 27442811  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
