

1899. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012 Sep;11(9):1988-98. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0167. Epub
2012 Jun 21.

YM155 reverses cisplatin resistance in head and neck cancer by decreasing
cytoplasmic survivin levels.

Kumar B(1), Yadav A, Lang JC, Cipolla MJ, Schmitt AC, Arradaza N, Teknos TN,
Kumar P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery, Comprehensive Cancer
Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.
Pawan.Kumar@osumc.edu

Cisplatin is one of the commonly used chemotherapeutic drugs for the treatment of
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). However, acquisition of cisplatin 
resistance is common in patients with HNSCC, and it often leads to local and
distant failure. In this study, we showed that survivin expression is
significantly upregulated in HNSCC primary tumors and cell lines. In addition,
survivin levels were significantly higher in human papilloma virus-negative
patients that normally respond poorly to cisplatin treatment. Survivin expression
was further increased in cisplatin-resistant cells (CAL27-CisR) as compared with 
its parent cells (CAL27). Therefore, we hypothesized that targeting of survivin
in HNSCC could reverse the resistant phenotype in tumor cells, thereby enhancing 
the therapeutic efficacy of cisplatin. We used both in vitro and in vivo models
to test the efficacy of YM155, a small molecule survivin inhibitor, either as a
single agent or in combination with cisplatin. YM155 significantly decreased
survivin levels and cell proliferation in a dose-dependent manner. In addition,
YM155 pretreatment significantly reversed cisplatin resistance in cancer cells.
Interestingly, YM155 treatment altered the dynamic localization of survivin in
cells by inducing a rapid reduction in cytoplasmic survivin, which plays a
critical role in its antiapoptotic function. In a severe combined immunodeficient
mouse xenograft model, YM155 significantly enhanced the antitumor and
antiangiogenic effects of cisplatin, with no added systemic toxicity. Taken
together, our results suggest a potentially novel strategy to use YM155 to
overcome the resistance in tumor cells, thereby enhancing the effectiveness of
the chemotherapy in HNSCC.

©2012 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0167 
PMCID: PMC3889136
PMID: 22723337  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
