

1905. Exp Cell Res. 2017 Apr 15;353(2):63-71. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2017.02.020. Epub
2017 Feb 20.

Thiazolidinediones abrogate cervical cancer growth.

Wuertz BR(1), Darrah L(2), Wudel J(3), Ondrey FG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Program, Department of Otolaryngology, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. Electronic address: knier003@umn.edu.
(2)Molecular Oncology Program, Department of Otolaryngology, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. Electronic address: ldarrah@obgynmn.com.
(3)Molecular Oncology Program, Department of Otolaryngology, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. Electronic address: drwudel@drwudel.com.
(4)Molecular Oncology Program, Department of Otolaryngology, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. Electronic address: ondre002@umn.edu.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR γ) is activated by
thiazolidinedione drugs (TZDs) and can promote anti-cancer properties. We used
three TZDs (pioglitazone, rosiglitazone, and ciglitazone) to target cervical
cancer cell lines and a nude mouse animal model. Each agent increased activation 
of PPAR γ, as judged by a luciferase reporter gene assay in three HPV-associated 
cell lines (CaSki, SiHa, and HeLa cells) while decreasing cellular proliferation 
in a dose-dependent manner. They also promoted Oil Red O accumulation in treated 
cell lines and upregulated the lipid differentiation marker adipsin.
Interestingly, xenograft HeLa tumors in nude mice treated with 100mg/kg/day
pioglitazone exhibited decreased growth compared to control mice or mice treated 
with standard cervical chemotherapy. In conclusion, TZDs slow tumor cell growth
in vitro and in vivo with decreases in cell proliferation and increases in PPAR γ
and adipsin. These agents may be interesting treatments or treatment adjuncts for
HPV-associated cancers or perhaps even precancerous conditions.

Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2017.02.020 
PMID: 28219679  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
