

192. Head Neck Oncol. 2009 Jun 25;1:22. doi: 10.1186/1758-3284-1-22.

Role of human papillomavirus and its detection in potentially malignant and
malignant head and neck lesions: updated review.

Chaudhary AK(1), Singh M, Sundaram S, Mehrotra R.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biotechnology, University of Allahabad, India. ajaygenome@gmail.com

Head and neck malignancies are characterized by a multiphasic and multifactorial 
etiopathogenesis. Tobacco and alcohol consumption are the most common risk
factors for head and neck malignancy. Other factors, including DNA viruses,
especially human papilloma virus (HPV), may also play a role in the initiation or
development of these lesions. The pathways of HPV transmission in the head and
neck mucosal lesions include oral-genital contact, more than one sexual partner
and perinatal transmission of HPV to the neonatal child. The increase in
prevalence of HPV infection in these lesions may be due to wider acceptance of
oral sex among teenagers and adults as this is perceived to be a form of safe
sex. The prevalence of HPV in benign lesions as well as malignancies has been
assessed by many techniques. Among these, the polymerase chain reaction is the
most sensitive method. Review of literature reveals that HPV may be a risk factor
for malignancies, but not in all cases. For confirmation of the role of HPV in
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, large population studies are necessary in 
an assortment of clinical settings. Prophylactic vaccination against high-risk
HPV types eventually may prevent a significant number of cervical carcinomas. Of 
the two vaccines currently available, Gardasil (Merck & Co., Inc.) protects
against HPV types 6, 11, 16 and 18, while the other vaccine, Cervarix
(GlaxoSmithKline, Rixensart, Belgium) protects against HPV types 16 and 18 only. 
However, the HPV vaccine has, to the best of our knowledge, not been tried in
head and neck carcinoma. The role of HPV in etiopathogenesis, prevalence in
benign and malignant lesions of this area and vaccination strategies are briefly 
reviewed here.

DOI: 10.1186/1758-3284-1-22 
PMCID: PMC2706235
PMID: 19555477  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
