

1923. Int J Cancer. 2014 May 15;134(10):2366-72. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28580. Epub 2013 Nov 
19.

Molecular characterization of p16-immunopositive but HPV DNA-negative
oropharyngeal carcinomas.

Rietbergen MM(1), Snijders PJ, Beekzada D, Braakhuis BJ, Brink A, Heideman DA,
Hesselink AT, Witte BI, Bloemena E, Baatenburg-De Jong RJ, Leemans CR, Brakenhoff
RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, VU University Medical
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Recent studies have reported that p16 protein overexpression qualifies as a
surrogate marker identifying an oncogenic human papillomavirus (HPV) infection in
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC). However, there is still a
percentage of OPSCCs that are positive for p16 immunohistochemistry (p16 IHC) but
lack HPV DNA. The objective of this study was to characterize this group at the
molecular level by performing sensitive HPV DNA- and RNA-based PCR methods and
genetic profiling. All patients diagnosed with an OPSCC in the period 2000-2006
in two Dutch university medical centers were included (n = 841). The presence of 
HPV in a tumor sample was tested by p16 IHC followed by an HPV DNA GP5+/6+ PCR.
p16 IHC scored positive in 195 samples, of which 161 were HPV DNA-positive and 34
(17%) HPV DNA-negative. In the latter group, a SPF10-LiPA25 assay, an HPV16
type-specific E7 PCR and an E6 mRNA RT-PCR were performed. Next, ten of these
cases were further analyzed for loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of 15 microsatellite
markers at chromosome arms 3p, 9p and 17p. Of the 34 p16-positive but
PCR-negative OPSCCs, two samples tested positive by SPF10 assay, HPV16 E7 PCR and
HPV16 E6 mRNA RT-PCR. Three samples tested positive by SPF10 assay but negative
by the HPV16-specific assays. Nine of ten cases that were tested for LOH showed a
genetic pattern comparable to that of HPV-negative tumors. This study categorizes
p16-positive but HPV DNA-negative OPSCCs as HPV-negative tumors based on genetic 
profiling. This study highlights the importance of performing HPV testing in
addition to p16 IHC for proper identification of HPV-associated OPSCCs.

Â© 2013 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.28580 
PMID: 24249631  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
