

1924. J Control Release. 2015 Sep 10;213:96-102. doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2015.06.022.
Epub 2015 Jun 18.

In vivo evaluation of matrix metalloproteinase responsive silk-elastinlike
protein polymers for cancer gene therapy.

Price R(1), Poursaid A(2), Cappello J(3), Ghandehari H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics and Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Utah, 
Salt Lake City, UT, USA; Utah Center for Nanomedicine, Nano Institute of Utah,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(2)Utah Center for Nanomedicine, Nano Institute of Utah, University of Utah, Salt
Lake City, UT, USA; Department of Bioengineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake
City, UT, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutics and Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Utah, 
Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutics and Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Utah, 
Salt Lake City, UT, USA; Utah Center for Nanomedicine, Nano Institute of Utah,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA; Department of Bioengineering,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. Electronic address:
hamid.ghandehari@pharm.utah.edu.

Silk-elastinlike protein polymers (SELPs) have been effectively used as
controlled release matrices for the delivery of viruses for cancer gene therapy
in preclinical models. However, the degradability of these polymers needs to be
tuned for improved localized intratumoral gene delivery. Using recombinant
techniques, systematic modifications in distinct regions of the polymer backbone,
namely, within the elastin blocks, silk blocks, and adjacent to silk and elastin 
blocks, have been made to impart sensitivity to specific matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) known to be overexpressed in the tumor environment. In 
this report we investigated the structure-function relationship of MMP-responsive
SELPs for viral mediated gene therapy of head and neck cancer. These polymers
showed significant degradation in vitro in the presence of MMPs. Their
degradation rate was a function of the location of the MMP-responsive sequence in
the polymer backbone when in hydrogel form. Treatment efficacy of the adenoviral 
vectors released from the MMP responsive SELP analogs in a xenograft mouse model 
of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) was shown to be polymer
structure dependent. These results demonstrate the tunable nature of
MMP-responsive SELPs for localized matrix-mediated gene delivery.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2015.06.022 
PMCID: PMC4684501
PMID: 26095079  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
