

1926. J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2012 Apr;41 Suppl 1:S65-70.

Epigenetic differences between human papillomavirus-positive and -negative
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas.

Biron VL(1), Mohamed A, Hendzel MJ, Alan Underhill D, Seikaly H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Department of Surgery,
Michael J Hendzel and D Alan Underhill, Undergraduate Education, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, AB.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetic modifications are defined as heritable changes in gene
expression that are not encoded in deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). Despite the
importance of epigenetics in tumorigenesis, there is a paucity of information
regarding the epigenetic profiles of oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma
(OPSCC).
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to identify epigenetic signatures
associated with human papillomavirus (HPV)-positive and -negative OPSCC.
METHODS: We collected demographic, pathologic, and survival data from 44 patients
with advanced-stage OPSCC treated with surgery and chemoradiation at the
University of Alberta between January 2006 and December 2008. Tumour specimen
from these patients were retreived and sectioned for immunohistochemical
analysis. Double immunofluorescence staining was performed with p16 (HPV
surrogate) and a panel of epigenetic markers, namely, histone methyl-lysines 4,
9, and 27 and H4 methyl-lysine 20. Correlation between p16 and epigenetic markers
was measured using Metamorph and Image J software.
RESULTS: Forty-one percent of patients were p16 positive. No statistically
significant differences were found between p16-positive and -negative patients in
terms of age at diagnosis, tumour subsite, or smoking history. We found
significant differences in histone methylation between p16-positive and -negative
tumours. OPSCC tumours positive for p16 had global elevations of histone H4
monomethylated lysine 20 (H4K20me1) and H3 trimethylated lysine 27 (H3K27me3)
with depletions of H4 trimethylated lysine 20 (H4K20me3). In contrast,
p16-negative tumours had depleted levels of H4K20me1 and H3K27me3 with high
levels of H4K20me3.
CONCLUSIONS: HPV-positive and -negative OPSCCs have distinct epigenetic profiles 
representing broad gene expression differences between these tumours.


PMID: 22569052  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
