

1929. Cell Death Dis. 2016 Jan 21;7:2060. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.391.

Flavonol and imidazole derivatives block HPV16 E6 activities and reactivate
apoptotic pathways in HPV‚Å∫ cells.

Yuan CH(1), Filippova M(1), Krstenansky JL(2), Duerksen-Hughes PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Sciences, Loma Linda University School of Medicine, 11021 
Campus Street, 101 Alumni Hall, Loma Linda, CA 92354, USA.
(2)KGI School of Pharmacy, 535 Watson Drive, Claremont, CA 91711, USA.

High-risk human papillomaviruses (HR-HPVs) cause nearly all cases of cervical
cancer, as well as approximately 30% of head and neck cancers. HPV 16 E6, one of 
two major viral oncogenes, protects cells from apoptosis by binding to and
accelerating the degradation of several proteins important in apoptotic
signaling, including caspase 8 and p53. We proposed that blocking the
interactions between HPV E6 and its partners using small molecules had the
potential to re-sensitize HPV(+) cells to apoptosis. To test this idea, we
screened libraries of small molecules for candidates that could block E6/caspase 
8 binding and identified several candidates from different chemical classes. We
tested hits for dose-dependency and specificity in vitro and for toxicity in a
cell-based assay and then used this information to select the two best candidates
for further testing: myricetin, a flavonol, and spinacine, an imidazole
amino-acid derivative of histidine. Both compounds clearly inhibited the ability 
of E6 to bind in vitro to both caspase 8 and E6AP, the protein that mediates p53 
degradation. In addition, both compounds were able to increase the level of
caspase 8 and p53 in SiHa cervical cancer cells, resulting in an increase of
caspase 3/7 activity. Finally, both myricetin and spinacine sensitized HPV(+)
cervical and oral cancer cells, but not HPV(-) cervical and oral cancer cells, to
apoptosis induced by the cancer-specific ligand TRAIL, as well as the
chemotherapeutic agents doxorubicin and cisplatin. New therapies based on this
work may improve treatment for HPV(+) cancer patients.

DOI: 10.1038/cddis.2015.391 
PMCID: PMC5154303
PMID: 26794656  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
