

193. Oral Oncol. 2010 Oct;46(10):705-11. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2010.07.006. Epub
2010 Sep 16.

Human papilloma virus in locally advanced stage III/IV squamous cell cancer of
the oropharynx and impact on choice of therapy.

Ihloff AS(1), Petersen C, Hoffmann M, Knecht R, Tribius S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, University Medical
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.

Oropharyngeal cancers (OPCs) are now believed to arise from two distinct
pathways: one influenced by alcohol and tobacco use and the other a result of
genomic instability induced by the human papilloma virus (HPV). The incidence of 
HPV-associated OPC is increasing, particularly among younger males. Case series
and clinical trials suggest that patients with HPV-positive OPC have better
clinical outcomes than those with HPV-negative tumors. We evaluated efficacy data
in published articles and meeting abstracts from clinical studies comparing
response rates and survival outcomes in patients with HPV-positive and -negative 
locally advanced OPC. Eight clinical studies were identified: half were
prospective analyses of outcome according to HPV status; the remaining four
reports were retrospective analyses. The majority of these analyses showed that
patients with HPV-positive tumors had significantly better responses to treatment
than those with HPV-negative tumors. In the two studies in which the effect of
treatment was also evaluated, patients with HPV-positive tumors did not benefit
significantly from intensive therapy, unlike those with HPV-negative tumors.
HPV-positive tumor status is an important prognostic factor associated with a
favorable outcome in patients with locally advanced OPC. The HPV status of
patients with locally advanced OPC should be established before treatment
commences. Surgery is well accepted in the treatment of OPC, but the place of
chemoradiotherapy has yet to be confirmed. Prospective, well-controlled clinical 
studies are required to establish whether chemoradiotherapy provides an
acceptable risk-benefit balance versus high-quality radiotherapy alone in
patients with HPV-positive OPC, in whom the goal is to maximize progression-free 
and overall survival, while preserving function and maintaining quality of life.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2010.07.006 
PMID: 20843732  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
