

1936. Am J Surg Pathol. 2014 Jun;38(6):809-15. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000183.

Keratinizing-type squamous cell carcinoma of the oropharynx: p16 overexpression
is associated with positive high-risk HPV status and improved survival.

Cai C(1), Chernock RD, Pittman ME, El-Mofty SK, Thorstad WL, Lewis JS Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology and Immunology †Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery
‡Radiation Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO.

It is well established that nonkeratinizing squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the 
oropharynx is causally related to transcriptionally active human papillomavirus
(HPV) and has better survival as compared with carcinomas with a keratinizing
phenotype (KSCC). Although the great majority of KSCCs are unrelated to HPV,
transcriptionally active HPV is detected in a minority of oropharyngeal cases. To
date, it has not been established whether the HPV status in KSCC also confers a
survival advantage as it does in HPV-related nonkeratinizing SCC. This study
compares clinical outcomes between patients with HPV-positive versus HPV-negative
oropharyngeal KSCC. Among a total of 54 cases, 7 (13%) were diffusely and
strongly positive for p16. HPV E6/E7 RNA was positive in 5 of the 6 (83%)
p16-positive cases that were tested and in only 1 of the 47 (2%) p16-negative
cases. Only 1 of the 7 (14%) p16-positive patients developed disease recurrence
and died in the follow-up period. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis showed
significantly better overall and disease-specific survival in the p16-positive
than in the p16-negative patients (P=0.01 and 0.046, respectively). These data,
although with relatively small patient numbers, suggest that HPV-related SCC in
the oropharynx is associated with highly favorable outcomes, regardless of the
keratinizing or nonkeratinizing phenotype.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000183 
PMID: 24698966  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
