

1946. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 Feb;37(2):185-92. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3182698673.

Human papillomavirus-related carcinomas of the sinonasal tract.

Bishop JA(1), Guo TW, Smith DF, Wang H, Ogawa T, Pai SI, Westra WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD
21231, USA. jbishop@jhmi.edu

High-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) is an established cause of head and neck
carcinomas arising in the oropharynx. The presence of HPV has also been reported 
in some carcinomas arising in the sinonasal tract, but little is known about
their overall incidence or their clinicopathologic profile. The surgical
pathology archives of The Johns Hopkins Hospital were searched for all carcinomas
arising in the sinonasal tract from 1995 to 2011, and tissue microarrays were
constructed. p16 immunohistochemical analysis and DNA in situ hybridization for
high-risk types of HPV were performed. Demographic and clinical outcome data were
extracted from patient medical records. Of 161 sinonasal carcinomas, 34 (21%)
were positive for high-risk HPV DNA, including type 16 (82%), type 31/33 (12%),
and type 18 (6%). HPV-positive carcinomas consisted of 28 squamous cell
carcinomas and variants (15 nonkeratinizing or partially keratinizing, 4
papillary, 5 adenosquamous, 4 basaloid), 1 small cell carcinoma, 1 sinonasal
undifferentiated carcinoma, and 4 carcinomas that were difficult to classify but 
exhibited adenoid cystic carcinoma-like features. Immunohistochemistry for p16
was positive in 59/161 (37%) cases, and p16 expression strongly correlated with
the presence of HPV DNA: 33 of 34 (97%) HPV-positive tumors exhibited high p16
expression, whereas only 26 of 127 (20%) HPV-negative tumors were p16 positive
(P<0.0001). The HPV-related carcinomas occurred in 19 men and 15 women ranging in
age from 33 to 87 years (mean, 54 y). A trend toward improved survival was
observed in the HPV-positive group (hazard ratio=0.58, 95% confidence interval
[0.26, 1.28]). The presence of high-risk HPV in 21% of sinonasal carcinomas
confirms HPV as an important oncologic agent of carcinomas arising in the
sinonasal tract. Although nonkeratinizing squamous cell carcinoma is the most
common histologic type, there is a wide morphologic spectrum of HPV-related
disease that includes a variant that resembles adenoid cystic carcinoma. The
distinctiveness of these HPV-related carcinomas of the sinonasal tract with
respect to risk factors, clinical behavior, and response to therapy remains to be
clarified.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3182698673 
PMCID: PMC3545097
PMID: 23095507  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
