

1949. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2012 Apr;16(2):91-9. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2011.09.002.
Epub 2011 Dec 23.

Is p16 immunohistochemistry a more cost-effective method for identification of
human papilloma virus-associated head and neck squamous cell carcinoma?

Thomas J(1), Primeaux T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center,
Shreveport, 71130, USA. jtho19@lsuhsc.edu

Tobacco and alcohol use are established risk factors for head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma (HNSCC). However, patients with a unique subset of human papilloma
virus (HPV)-associated HNSCC have been documented to have a better survival
outcome. These tumors occur more frequently in the tonsils and oropharyngeal
sites, among younger patients, higher socioeconomic group, and those exposed to
more sexual partners and oral sex compared with HPV-negative HNSCC. Although
tobacco- and alcohol-related HNSCCs appear to be on the decline, tonsillar and
oropharyngeal HPV-associated tumors seem to be on the rise, and their prevalence 
varies widely in published reports, ranging from 20% to 60%. Human papilloma
virus detection methods in tumor tissue vary and include polymerase chain
reaction, in situ hybridization (ISH) technique for HPV DNA, and E6/E7 messenger 
RNA, with p16 immunohistochemistry (IHC) as a surrogate marker. The sensitivity
and specificity of the different methods used are likely contributory factors to 
this wide variation. This study compares the p16 IHC staining patterns in HNSCC
and laryngeal papillomas and assesses the concordance of p16 and high-risk
HPV-ISH to determine the usefulness of p16 as a first-line marker. Using an
objective criterion of diffuse intense confluent staining pattern as definite
positive (akin to the 3+ of HER2/neu in breast cancer) and focal scattered
staining pattern as equivocal reaction requiring confirmatory HPV assay, p16 IHC 
expression shows good concordance with high-risk HPV-ISH and can be used as a
first-line marker. We propose p16 overexpression as a suitable surrogate and
screening marker, with high potential of impacting the standard of care.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2011.09.002 
PMID: 22197546  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
