

1950. Am J Surg Pathol. 2016 Aug;40(8):1117-24. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000650.

Histologic Typing in Oropharyngeal Squamous Cell Carcinoma: A 4-Year Prospective 
Practice Study With p16 and High-Risk HPV mRNA Testing Correlation.

Gondim DD(1), Haynes W, Wang X, Chernock RD, El-Mofty SK, Lewis JS Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology and Immunology †Radiation Oncology ‡Otolaryngology
Head and Neck Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO
Departments of §Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology ∥Otolaryngology,
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN.

Oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas (OPSCCs) associated with human
papillomavirus (HPV) represent a distinct clinical and pathologic entity. The
majority of HPV-related OPSCCs have a characteristic nonkeratinizing morphology. 
This study sought to determine the strength of the association between
nonkeratinizing histology and HPV status compared with other squamous cell
carcinoma variants in 4 years of routine clinical practice on a high-volume head 
and neck service. Primary and/or nodal metastatic tumors in all cases of OPSCC
from 2010 to 2013 were typed by 1 of 3 head and neck pathologists as
keratinizing, nonkeratinizing, nonkeratinizing with maturation, or another
defined variant. All were assessed for p16 by immunohistochemistry with a 70%
nuclear and cytoplasmic positivity cutoff as part of routine clinical practice.
In addition, 70 consecutive cases from 1 year were "audited" for high-risk HPV
mRNA by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction and in situ
hybridization. Of the 435 cases, the majority (90%) consisted of 1 of the 3 main 
types described and the rest (10%) of uncommon variants. Nonkeratinizing
morphology had 99.1% and 100.0% positive predictive value for p16 and high-risk
HPV mRNA positivity, respectively. Nonkeratinizing with maturation, keratinizing,
and other specific squamous cell carcinoma variants were p16 positive in 91.8%,
22.8%, and 79.5%, respectively. All 47 nonkeratinizing OPSCCs tested for HPV mRNA
were positive. In summary, strictly defined nonkeratinizing OPSCC (which
constitutes ∼55% of all tumors) essentially implies positivity for both p16 and
transcriptionally active high-risk HPV.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000650 
PMID: 27035614  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
