

1951. Int J Cancer. 2014 Mar 15;134(6):1323-34. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28462. Epub 2013 Sep
23.

The role of the antileukoprotease SLPI in smoking-induced human
papillomavirus-independent head and neck squamous cell carcinomas.

Quabius ES(1), Möller P, Haag J, Pfannenschmidt S, Hedderich J, Görögh T, Röcken 
C, Hoffmann M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery,
Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, D-24105, Kiel, Germany; Institute of
Immunology, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, D-24105, Kiel, Germany.

Recently, we showed that increased SLPI levels prevent human papillomavirus (HPV)
infections and metastasis in smoking-induced, non-HPV-driven head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Here, we focus on the role of SLPI in
non-HPV-driven HNSCC, investigating tumor tissue and non-neoplastic mucosa from
the same patients and from non-HNSCC patients. Gene and protein expression of
SLPI and gene expression of annexin 2 (a SLPI receptor), nicotine receptor
(α7AChR) and arylhydrocarbon receptor (AhR) were analyzed in HNSCC patients (20
smokers; 16 nonsmokers). SLPI-results were correlated with the patients' HPV
status. Non-neoplastic mucosa of HNSCC patients and normal mucosa from non-HNSCC 
individuals (18 smokers; 20 nonsmokers) was analyzed for the same parameters.
Tissue of the inferior turbinate (n = 10) was incubated with nicotine for
analysis of the same genes. SLPI gene expression in tumor tissue was 109.26 ±
23.08 times higher in smokers versus nonsmokers. Non-neoplastic mucosa of smokers
showed also higher SLPI gene expression (10.49 ± 1.89-fold non-HNSCC; 18.02 ±
3.93-fold HNSCC patients). Annexin 2 gene expression was also increased in
smokers. SLPI data were corroborated by immunohistochemistry. A nicotine
dependent correlation between SLPI and annexin 2 gene expression (r(2) = 0.15, p 
< 0.001) was shown ex vivo. Nicotine and smoking increased α7AChR and AhR gene
expression. Five patients, showing no/low SLPI expression, were HPV16-positive. A
significant correlation between smoking and SLPI expression in tumors and to our 
knowledge for the first time in mucosa of HNSCC and non-HNSCC patients was
established. Together with the finding that all patients with HPV infection
showed no/low SLPI expression, these data support our intriguing hypothesis that 
smoking induced upregulated SLPI prevents HPV infections.

© 2013 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.28462 
PMID: 23996702  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
