

1952. Am J Surg Pathol. 2014 Feb;38(2):257-64. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000119.

Use of p40 and p63 immunohistochemistry and human papillomavirus testing as
ancillary tools for the recognition of head and neck sarcomatoid carcinoma and
its distinction from benign and malignant mesenchymal processes.

Bishop JA(1), Montgomery EA, Westra WH.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology †Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery ‡Orthopedic
Surgery §Oncology, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD.

Sarcomatoid carcinoma (SC) is a variant of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma 
characterized by a prominent and sometimes exclusive spindle cell component.
Distinction from a sarcoma or reactive stroma can be problematic, particularly in
cases in which the conventional component is not obvious. The value of
immunohistochemistry is limited because of the loss of cytokeratin expression in 
a sizable percentage of cases. Staining for p63 can enhance detection of
epithelial differentiation, but its usefulness is offset by expression in various
soft tissue proliferations. Staining for p40--a squamous-specific isoform of
p63--could potentially improve diagnostic accuracy. Immunohistochemistry for
pancytokeratin, p63, and p40 was performed on 37 head and neck SCs, 201 soft
tissue neoplasms, and 40 reactive stromal proliferations. The SCs were also
stained for p16 in the event that some of the tumors were human papillomavirus
(HPV) related. HPV in situ hybridization was performed on p16-positive cases.
Twenty-three of 37 (62%) SCs were positive for pancytokeratin, 23 of 37 (62%)
were positive for p63, and 20 of 37 (54%) were positive for p40. Compared with
p63, p40 staining was less likely to be observed in soft tissue tumors (5% vs.
30%) and reactive stromal proliferations (0% vs. 30%). HPV16 was detected in 3 of
10 (30%) SCs of the oropharynx but in none of the nonoropharyngeal SCs. p40
staining does not improve the sensitivity for diagnosing SC, but it does diminish
the risk of misdiagnosing a sarcoma or reactive stroma as SC. The presence of a
sarcomatoid variant of HPV-related oropharyngeal cancer points to HPV testing as 
a useful diagnostic tool for atypical spindle cell proliferations of the
oropharynx.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000119 
PMCID: PMC4313886
PMID: 24418859  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
