

1954. Int J Cancer. 2013 Apr 15;132(8):1781-9. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27846. Epub 2012 Oct
11.

Chromosome stability in tonsillar squamous cell carcinoma is associated with
HPV16 integration and indicates a favorable prognosis.

Mooren JJ(1), Kremer B, Claessen SM, Voogd AC, Bot FJ, Peter Klussmann J,
Huebbers CU, Hopman AH, Ramaekers FC, Speel EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, GROW-School for
Oncology and Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical Center, The
Netherlands. Jeroenmooren@hotmail.com

Tonsillar squamous cell carcinoma (TSCC) is frequently associated with human
papillomavirus (HPV) and chromosome instability. Data from cellular model systems
are, however, controversial concerning a relation between HPV and chromosome
instability development. Here we studied this association in 77 primary TSCC with
known clinical outcome and cell cycle protein expression profiles. Thirty-two
tumors (42%) showed HPV16-integration. All 77 cases were analyzed by fluorescence
in situ hybridization using chromosome 1- and 7-specific centromere DNA probes to
detect chromosome instability, indicated by the presence of chromosome imbalances
and/or polyploidization for these chromosomes. In addition, eight HPV-positive
dysplasias, seven of which were adjacent to a carcinoma, were analyzed. Disomy
for chromosome 1 and 7 was present in 29 out of 77 TSCC (38%), of which 19 were
HPV16-positive (p = 0.002). Aneusomy was observed in the remaining 48 TSCC, of
which 13 were HPV-positive. Aneusomies correlated significantly with tobacco- and
alcohol consumption (p = 0.001 and p = 0.016, respectively) and a higher T-stage 
(p = 0.018). Both HPV-positivity and chromosome disomy were significantly
associated with a favorable disease-free survival (p = 0.001 and p = 0.025,
respectively). Particularly in the HPV16-positive group chromosome instability is
a very strong indicator for an unfavorable prognosis (p = 0.032). In the
dysplasias an identical HPV and chromosome copy number status was identified as
in the adjacent tumors. We conclude that HPV-positive TSCC and their precursor
lesions are more often genetically stable than HPV-negative lesions and that
these tumors are associated with a favorable prognosis. Chromosome instability is
an indicator for unfavorable prognosis, particularly in the HPV-positive patient 
group.

Copyright Â© 2012 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.27846 
PMID: 22987500  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
