

1957. BMC Cancer. 2013 Jan 18;13:26. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-26.

Differential outcome of concurrent radiotherapy plus epidermal growth factor
receptor inhibitors versus radiotherapy plus cisplatin in patients with human
papillomavirus-related head and neck cancer.

Pajares B(1), Trigo JM, Toledo MD, Álvarez M, González-Hermoso C, Rueda A, Medina
JA, de Luque V, Jerez JM, Alba E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, University Hospital Virgen de la Victoria,
Málaga, Spain. bella.pajares@fundacionimabis.org

BACKGROUND: Human papillomavirus (HPV)-related head and neck cancer has been
associated with an improved prognosis in patients treated with radiotherapy (RT) 
+/- chemotherapy (CT); however, RT combined with epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) inhibitors has not been fully studied in this group of patients.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical expression of p16 and PCR of HPV16 DNA were
retrospectively analyzed in tumor blocks from 108 stage III/IV head and neck
cancer patients treated with RT+CT (56) or RT+EGFR inhibitors (52). Disease-free 
survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS) were analyzed by the Kaplan-Meier
method.
RESULTS: DNA of HPV16 was found in 12 of 108 tumors (11%) and p16 positivity in
18 tumors (17%), with similar rates in both arms of treatment. After a median
follow-up time of 35 months (range 6-135), p16-positive patients treated with
RT+EGFR inhibitors showed improved survival compared with those treated with
RT+CT (2-year OS 88% vs. 60%, HR 0.18; 95% CI 0.04 to 0.88; p = 0.01; and 2-year 
DFS 75% vs. 47%, HR 0.17; 95% CI 0.03 to 0.8; p = 0.01). However, no differences 
were observed in p16-negative patients (2-year OS 56% vs. 53%, HR 0.97; 95% CI
0.55 to 1.7; p = 0.9; and 2-year DFS 43% vs. 45%, HR 0.99; 95% CI 0.57 to 1.7; p 
= 0.9).
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study to show that p16-positive patients may
benefit more from RT+EGFR inhibitors than conventional RT+CT. These results are
hypothesis-generating and should be confirmed in prospective trials.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-26 
PMCID: PMC3637564
PMID: 23331666  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
