

1958. Hum Pathol. 2018 Feb;72:45-51. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2017.10.021. Epub 2017 Oct 
28.

Eps8 expression is significantly lower in p16+ head and neck squamous cell
carcinomas (HNSCCs) compared with p16- HNSCCs.

Nasri E(1), Wiesen LB(1), Knapik JA(1), Fredenburg KM(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Florida College of Medicine, Department of Pathology,
Immunology, and Laboratory Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610.
(2)University of Florida College of Medicine, Department of Pathology,
Immunology, and Laboratory Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610. Electronic address:
kfredenburg@ufl.edu.

In vitro head and neck cancer studies have demonstrated that epidermal growth
factor receptor kinase substrate 8 (Eps8) overexpression contributes to squamous 
carcinogenesis. Oral squamous cell carcinoma studies have correlated Eps8
expression with metastatic disease and poor prognosis. Head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma (HNSCC) studies comparing its expression by anatomic site or in in
vivo regional metastases have not been performed. In this study, we compared Eps8
expression in HNSCCs arising in the oral cavity (OCSCC) and oropharynx (OPSCC)
along with their corresponding regional lymph node (LN) metastases. We then
correlated our findings with clinicopathologic data including
tumor-node-metastasis stage, p16 status, age, sex, and smoking and alcohol
history. Eps8 immunohistochemistry was performed on 69 archived OCSCCs and
OPSCCs, and 24 paired and 4 unpaired LNs. Expression was scored from 0 to 3. Eps8
expression was detected in 49% of combined OCSCC and OPSCC cases. We found that
expression correlated with advanced tumor stage (P = .022) and p16 status (P =
.032) but not with anatomic site. Notably, p16+ HNSCCs had significantly lower
Eps8 expression than p16- HNSCCs. No significant difference was observed between 
primary HNSCCs and their corresponding metastatic LNs. Neither p16 status nor
anatomic site influenced Eps8 expression in regional LN metastases. In
conclusion, our data offer in vivo support that, in HNSCCs, Eps8 is involved in
tumor invasion but not necessarily the development of regional LN metastasis. The
association between low Eps8 expression and p16+ HNSCCs suggests that alternative
signaling pathways may be used for their tumorigenesis.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2017.10.021 
PMID: 29107665  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
