

1965. Int J Cancer. 2013 Aug 1;133(3):695-704. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28051. Epub 2013 Feb
25.

Variants in nucleotide excision repair core genes and susceptibility to
recurrence of squamous cell carcinoma of the oropharynx.

Song X(1), Sturgis EM, Jin L, Wang Z, Wei Q, Li G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030-4009, USA.

Genetically determined capacity for NER may modulate both cancer risk and
prognosis. Thus, we evaluated associations of seven selected variants in the NER 
core genes with recurrence risk in 658 squamous cell carcinoma of the oropharynx 
(SCCOP) patients treated principally by radiation. The seven polymorphisms in the
core NER genes (XPC-rs2228000, XPC-rs2228001, XPD-rs1799793, XPD-rs13181,
XPG-rs17655, ERCC1-rs3212986 and XPA-rs1800975) were genotyped using PCR-RFLP
method and log-rank test and multivariable Cox models were used to evaluate the
associations in both dominant and recessive genetic models. In a dominant model, 
we found that polymorphisms of XPC-rs2228000, XPD-rs1799793 and XPG-rs17655 were 
significantly associated with disease-free survival (log-rank, p = 0.014; p =
0.00008; p = 0.0007, respectively), and these polymorphisms were significantly
associated with recurrence risk of SCCOP (hazard ratio (HR) = 1.6, 95% confidence
interval (CI) 1.1-2.3 for XPC-rs2228000; HR = 0.4, 95% 0.3-0.6 for XPD-rs1799793 
and HR = 0.5, 95% CI 0.4-0.8 for XPG-rs17655) after multivariable adjustment.
Moreover, the borderline significant or significant associations were also found 
for these three polymorphisms in HPV16/18-positive SCCOP patients (HR = 1.6, 95% 
CI 1.0-4.1 for XPC-rs2228000; HR = 0.2, 95% CI 0.1-0.5 for XPD-rs1799793 and HR =
0.1, 95% CI 0.0-0.9 for XPG-rs17655). However, similarly significant associations
were not found for these polymorphisms in a recessive model. These findings
suggest that polymorphisms of XPC-rs2228000, XPD-rs1799793 and XPG-rs17655 in the
NER core genes may contribute to recurrence risk of SCCOP, particularly
HPV-positive SCCOP, in a dominant but not in a recessive model. However,
validation of these results is warranted.

Copyright Â© 2013 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.28051 
PMCID: PMC3663873
PMID: 23335232  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
