

1973. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2009 Oct;194(1):58-64. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2009.06.005.

Role of the RARRES1 gene in nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Kwok WK(1), Pang JC, Lo KW, Ng HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, 30-32 Ngan Shing Street, Shatin, Hong Kong.

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a unique type of head and neck cancer that is
most prevalent in southern China. Previous studies have suggested that genetic
susceptibility, environmental carcinogens, and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection
contribute to the etiology of NPC. Our group has identified the retinoic acid
receptor responder (tazarotene induced) 1 gene (RARRES1; alias TIG1) to be
transcriptionally silenced by promoter hypermethylation in approximately 90% of
NPC cases, suggesting that its inactivation may be important in NPC formation.
The aim of this study was to explore the functional role of the RARRES1 protein
(alias TIG1) in NPC cells with EBV infection (HK1-EBV) and without (HK1).
Cellular proliferation analysis, as measured by 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU)
incorporation, showed that knockdown and overexpression of TIG1 in HK1 led,
respectively, to significantly increased (P = 0.005) and reduced (P = 0.027)
proportions of BrdU-labeled cells, compared with control cells. In contrast,
knockdown or overexpression of TIG1 had no significant effect on cellular
proliferation in HK1-EBV cells. Invasion chamber assay showed that TIG1 knockdown
in HK1-EBV cells resulted in significant enhancement of invasive capacity of
HK1-EBV cells (P = 0.006). HK1 cells were not invasive, regardless of TIG1
status. These findings suggest that TIG1 may play a role in cellular
proliferation and invasion in NPC cells and that its function may be dependent on
the EBV status.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2009.06.005 
PMID: 19737656  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
