

1975. Viruses. 2015 Aug 7;7(8):4507-28. doi: 10.3390/v7082831.

Mate-Pair Sequencing as a Powerful Clinical Tool for the Characterization of
Cancers with a DNA Viral Etiology.

Gao G(1), Smith DI(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
gao.ge@mayo.edu.
(2)Division of Experimental Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
smith.david@mayo.edu.

DNA viruses are known to be associated with a variety of different cancers. Human
papillomaviruses (HPV) are a family of viruses and several of its sub-types are
classified as high-risk HPVs as they are found to be associated with the
development of a number of different cancers. Almost all cervical cancers appear 
to be driven by HPV infection and HPV is also found in most cancers of the anus
and at least half the cancers of the vulva, penis and vagina, and increasingly
found in one sub-type of head and neck cancers namely oropharyngeal squamous cell
carcinoma. Our understanding of HPVs role in cancer development comes from
extensive studies done on cervical cancer and it has just been assumed that HPV
plays an identical role in the development of all other cancers arising in the
presence of HPV sequences, although this has not been proven. Most invasive
cervical cancers have the HPV genome integrated into one or more sites within the
human genome. One powerful tool to examine all the sites of HPV integration in a 
cancer but that also provides a comprehensive view of genomic alterations in that
cancer is the use of next generation sequencing of mate-pair libraries produced
from the DNA isolated. We will describe how this powerful technology can provide 
important information about the genomic organization within an individual cancer 
genome, and how this has demonstrated that HPVs role in oropharyngeal squamous
cell carcinoma is distinct from that in cervical cancer. We will also describe
why the sequencing of mate-pair libraries could be a powerful clinical tool for
the management of patients with a DNA viral etiology and how this could quickly
transform the care of these patients.

DOI: 10.3390/v7082831 
PMCID: PMC4576192
PMID: 26262638  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
