

1980. Cancer Sci. 2012 Jul;103(7):1259-66. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2012.02301.x. Epub 
2012 May 25.

Insulin-like growth factor binding protein-3 suppresses vascular endothelial
growth factor expression and tumor angiogenesis in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma.

Oh SH(1), Kim WY, Lee OH, Kang JH, Woo JK, Kim JH, Glisson B, Lee HY.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Gachon University, Incheon.

Erratum in
    Cancer Sci. 2012 Aug;103(8):1600.

Angiogenesis, the process by which new blood vessels are recruited to existing
ones, is essential for tumor development. Insulin-like growth factor (IGF)
binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3), which modulates bioavailability of IGF, has been
studied for its potential role in angiogenesis during tissue regeneration and
cancer development. In this study, we assessed the role of IGFBP-3 in tumor
angiogenesis in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) and human umbilical
vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) using adenoviral (Ad-BP3) and recombinant (rBP3) 
IGFBP-3. Using an in vivo orthotopic tongue tumor model, we confirmed that both
Ad-BP3 and rBP3 suppress the growth of UMSCC38 HNSCC cells in vivo. Ad-BP3
inhibited vascularization in tongue tumors and chorio-allantoic membrane, and
suppressed angiogenesis-stimulating activities in UMSCC38 cells. In HUVECs,
Ad-BP3 decreased migration, invasion, and tube formation. rBP3 also suppressed
production of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in HUVECs and UMSCC38
cells. IGFBP-3-GGG, a mutant IGFBP-3 with loss of IGF binding capacity,
suppressed VEGF production. In addition, we found that IGFBP-3 suppressed VEGF
expression, even in mouse embryonic fibroblasts from an IGF-1R-null mouse.
Finally, we demonstrated that IGFBP-3-GGG inhibits tumor angiogenesis and growth 
to the same degree as wild-type IGFBP-3. Taken together, these results support
the hypothesis that IGFBP-3 has anti-angiogenic activity in HNSCC, at least in
part due to IGF-independent suppression of VEGF production from vascular
endothelial cells and cancer cells.

Â© 2012 Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2012.02301.x 
PMCID: PMC3465461
PMID: 22494072  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
