

1981. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2017 Apr;274(4):1959-1965. doi:
10.1007/s00405-016-4412-8. Epub 2016 Dec 20.

p16INK4 expression is of prognostic and predictive value in oropharyngeal cancers
independent of human papillomavirus status: a Hungarian study.

Brauswetter D(1), Birtalan E(2), Danos K(2), Kocsis A(3), Krenacs T(4), Timar
J(5), Mihalyi R(6), Horcsik D(6), Polony G(2), Tamas L(2), Petak I(7).

Author information: 
(1)MTA-SE Pathobiochemistry Research Group, Tűzoltó utca 37-47, Budapest, 1094,
Hungary. brauswetter.diana@med.semmelweis-univ.hu.
(2)Department of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Semmelweis
University, Szigony Str. 36, Budapest, 1083, Hungary.
(3)NEUMANN Diagnostics Kft., Nagyvárad Str. 15, Pécs, 7623, Hungary.
(4)Department of Pathology and Experimental Cancer Research, Semmelweis
University and MTA-SE Tumorprogression Research Group, Üllői Str. 26, Budapest,
1085, Hungary.
(5)Department of Pathology, Semmelweis University, Üllői Str. 93, Budapest, 1091,
Hungary.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University, Üllői Str. 26, Budapest, 1085,
Hungary.
(7)MTA-SE Pathobiochemistry Research Group, Tűzoltó utca 37-47, Budapest, 1094,
Hungary.

Head and neck cancer treatment protocols still lack well-established biomarkers
of prognostic and predictive value. It is well known that human papillomavirus
(HPV)-related and non-HPV-related oropharyngeal cancers are distinct entities
concerning tumor biology and clinical outcome. However, there is an ongoing
debate whether tumor suppressor p16INK4 status alone or both p16INK4 and HPV
detection should be used in clinical settings. The aim of this study was to
investigate p16INK4-immunolabelled and HPV-induced rates and determine their
clinical significance in 110 primary head and neck squamous cell carcinomas. The 
expression of p16INK4 protein was assessed with immunohistochemistry, while
high-risk HPV detection was performed using DNA PCR method. P16INK4
immunolabelling was detected in 17.3% of all tumor samples, and in 38.1% of
oropharyngeal malignancies. Oropharyngeal, p16INK4-immunolabelled tumors showed
an improved disease-specific survival compared to the non-p16INK4-immunolabelled 
group (median survival: 30.3 vs. 8.8 months, p < 0.001 with the log-rank test).
Furthermore, 56% of p16INK4-immunolabelled cases were tested positive for
HPV-DNA. The HPV-induced group presented better disease-specific survival
compared to the non-HPV-induced cases (median survival: 25.9 vs. 9.5 months,
p = 0.024 with the log-rank test). Improved response rates to neoadjuvant
chemotherapy were observed both in p16INK4-immunolabelled and p16INK4-
immunolabelled/HPV DNA- containing groups (Fisher's exact test: p = 0.025 and
p = 0.009). In conclusion, p16INK4 immunohistochemistry proved to be a reliable
and affordable tool for prognostic and predictive testing of head and neck
squamous cell cancers. The p16INK4 immunopositivity status alone was confirmed to
be an equally precise indicator of clinical outcome as p16INK4/HPV DNA PCR double
testing.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-016-4412-8 
PMID: 27999998  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
