

1982. Vaccine. 2011 Nov 8;29(48):9112-22. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.02.091. Epub 2011
Mar 17.

The predicted impact of HPV vaccination on male infections and male HPV-related
cancers in Australia.

Smith MA(1), Lew JB, Walker RJ, Brotherton JM, Nickson C, Canfell K.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Epidemiology Research Unit, Cancer Council New South Wales, Sydney,
Australia. megans@nswcc.org.au

Australia implemented a National HPV Vaccination Program in 2007, with routine
vaccination of 12-13 year old females and catch-up in females aged 13-26 years to
2009. The aim of this study was to estimate the impact of the current female-only
national vaccination program on males, and then to estimate the incremental
benefits to males from being included in the program. We used preliminary data to
estimate vaccination coverage in females. We then fitted a dynamic model of
sexual behaviour and HPV transmission in Australia to local data on female
pre-vaccination age-specific HPV prevalence, predicted the corresponding
pre-vaccination prevalence in males due to heterosexual transmission, and
modelled the short and long term impact of female-only versus female-and-male
vaccination programs. The estimated 3-dose female coverage rates were 78% (range 
70-80%) for ongoing coverage in 12-13 year old girls; and from 74% (range 70-80%)
in 14 year olds, to 25% (range 15-35%) for women aged 26 years old in 2007. The
median estimate for age-standardised pre-vaccination HPV 16 prevalence in females
and males aged 15-59 years was 3.2% (95% range: 2.4-4.1%) and 3.1% (95% range:
2.2-4.2%), respectively. The current program in females is predicted to result in
a 68% reduction in male HPV 16 infections by 2050, leading to an estimated long
term reduction of 14% in rates of cancers of the head, neck and anogenital area. 
The estimated proportion of the maximum possible vaccine-conferred benefit to
males from a female-and-male program which will be achieved by female-only
vaccination is 73% (range in probabilistic sensitivity analysis: 53-78%). In
conclusion, up to three-quarters of the maximum possible vaccination-conferred
benefit to males due to reduced heterosexual transmission will be achieved by the
existing female-only program.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.02.091 
PMID: 21419773  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
