

1983. Int J Cancer. 2015 Apr 1;136(7):1589-99. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29130. Epub 2014 Aug
19.

p16(INK4a) /Ki-67 co-expression specifically identifies transformed cells in the 
head and neck region.

Prigge ES(1), Toth C, Dyckhoff G, Wagner S, Müller F, Wittekindt C, Freier K,
Plinkert P, Hoffmann J, Vinokurova S, Klussmann JP, von Knebel Doeberitz M,
Reuschenbach M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Tumor Biology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Heidelberg, and Clinical Cooperation Unit Applied Tumor Biology, German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.

p16(INK4a) immunohistochemical overexpression is an overall reliable surrogate
marker of human papillomavirus (HPV)-associated head and neck squamous cell
carcinomas (HNSCC). However, cases of ambiguous p16(INK4a) overexpression are
regularly detected in the head and neck: p16(INK4a) expression can be observed in
non-malignant tissue, such as tonsillar crypt epithelium and a proportion of
branchial cleft cysts. Additionally, diverse patterns of p16(INK4) expression can
complicate interpretation of "p16(INK4a) -positivity". These aspects impede the
unrestricted application of p16(INK4a) as a diagnostic marker in the head and
neck. We hypothesized that combined detection of p16(INK4a) and the proliferation
marker Ki-67 could support clarification of ambiguous p16(INK4a) expression in
the head and neck by specifically indicating p16(INK4a) -expressing cells with
proliferative activity. p16(INK4a) /Ki-67 co-expression in a combined staining
procedure was correlated to distinct p16(INK4a) expression patterns and HPV
status (HPV DNA followed by E6*I oncogene mRNA detection) in 147 HNSCC and 50
non-malignant head and neck samples. p16(INK4a) /Ki-67 co-expression only
occurred in transformed cells of the head and neck. Co-expression was never
detected in non-transformed cells. Combined p16(INK4a) /Ki-67 expression was
stringently associated with a diffuse p16(INK4a) expression pattern. All HPV
oncogene-expressing HNSCC showed p16(INK4a) /Ki-67 co-expression. We demonstrate 
that p16(INK4a) /Ki-67 co-expression occurs exclusively in transformed cells of
the head and neck. Our findings indicate a substantial impact of combined
p16(INK4a) /Ki-67 expression in the assessment of ambiguous p16(INK4a) expression
in the head and neck by specifically identifying p16(INK4a) -expressing cells
with proliferative activity. This property will be of considerable significance
for head and neck histo- and cytopathology.

© 2014 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.29130 
PMID: 25104331  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
