

1985. Oncotarget. 2016 Apr 26;7(17):24228-41. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8286.

mTOR inhibition as an adjuvant therapy in a metastatic model of HPV+ HNSCC.

Coppock JD(1), Vermeer PD(1), Vermeer DW(1), Lee KM(1), Miskimins WK(1), Spanos
WC(1)(2), Lee JH(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Research Center, Sanford Research/USD, Sioux Falls, SD 57104,
USA.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, Sanford Health, Sioux
Falls, SD 57105, USA.

Effective treatments for recurrent/metastatic human papillomavirus-positive
(HPV+) head and neck squamous cell cancer (HNSCC) are limited. To aid treatment
development, we characterized a novel murine model of recurrent/metastatic HPV+
HNSCC. Further analysis of the parental tumor cell line and its four
recurrent/metastatic derivatives led to preclinical testing of an effective
treatment option for this otherwise fatal disease. Reverse phase protein arrays
identified key signaling cascades in the parental and recurrent/metastatic cell
lines. While protein expression profiles differed among the recurrent/metastatic 
cell lines, activated proteins associated with the mTOR signaling cascade were a 
commonality. Based on these data, mTOR inhibition was evaluated as an adjuvant
treatment for recurrent/metastatic disease. mTOR activity and treatment response 
were assessed in vitro by western blot, Seahorse, proliferation, clonogenic, and 
migration assays. Standard-of-care cisplatin/radiation therapy (CRT) versus
CRT/rapamycin were compared in vivo. Low-dose rapamycin inhibited mTOR signaling,
decreasing proliferation (43%) and migration (62%) while it enhanced CRT-induced 
cytotoxicity (3.3 fold) in clonogenic assays. Furthermore, rapamycin
re-sensitized CRT-resistant, metastatic tumors to treatment in vivo, improving
long-term cures (0-30% improved to 78-100%, depending on the recurrent/metastatic
cell line) and limiting lymph node metastasis (32%) and lung metastatic burden
(30 fold). Studies using immune compromised mice suggested rapamycin's effect on 
metastasis is independent of the adaptive immune response. These data suggest a
role of mTOR activation in HPV+ HNSCC recurrent/metastatic disease and that
adjuvant mTOR inhibition may enhance treatment of resistant, metastatic cell
populations at the primary site and limit distant metastasis.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.8286 
PMCID: PMC5029697
PMID: 27015118  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
