

1998. Mol Carcinog. 2015 Nov;54(11):1387-96. doi: 10.1002/mc.22214. Epub 2014 Sep 11.

Epigenetic pathogenesis of human papillomavirus in upper aerodigestive tract
cancers.

Talukdar FR(1), Ghosh SK(1), Laskar RS(1), Kannan R(1), Choudhury B(1), Bhowmik
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Laboratory, Department of Biotechnology, Assam University, 
Silchar, Assam, India.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) has been recently associated with squamous cell
carcinoma of upper aerodigestive tract (SCC of UADT), but its possible role in
promoting aberrant methylation in these tumors has largely remained unexplored.
Herein, we investigated the association of HPV with aberrant methylation in
tumor-related genes/loci consisting of the classical CpG Island Methylator
Phenotype (CIMP) panel markers (p16, MLH1, MINT1, MINT2, and MINT31) and other
frequently methylated cancer-related genes (DAPK1, GSTP1, BRCA1, ECAD, and
RASSF1) and survival of UDAT cancers. The study includes 219 SCC of UADT patients
from different hospitals of Northeast India. Detection of HPV and aberrant
promoter methylation was performed by PCR and Methylation Specific PCR
respectively. Association study was conducted by Logistic regression analysis and
overall survival analysis was done by Kaplan-Meier plot. HPV was detected in 37% 
of cases, with HPV-18 as the major high-risk sub-type. Although HPV presence did 
not seem to affect survival in overall UADT cancers, but was associated with a
favourable prognosis in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Hierarchical
clustering revealed three distinct clusters with different methylation profile
and HPV presence. Among these, the CIMP-high subgroup exhibited the highest HPV
positive cases (66%). Furthermore, multivariate analysis revealed a strong
synergistic association of HPV and tobacco towards modulating promoter
hypermethylation in UADT cancer (OR = 27.50 [95% CI = 11.51-88.03] for CIMP-high 
vs. CIMP-low). The present study proposes a potential role of HPV in impelling
aberrant methylation in specific tumor related loci, which might contribute in
the initiation and progression of SCC of UADT.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mc.22214 
PMID: 25213493  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
