

2008. Medicine (Baltimore). 2018 Aug;97(35):e12193. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000012193.

Recombinant adenovirus-p53 enhances the therapeutic effect of surgery and
chemoradiotherapy combination in hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas
patients.

Liu J(1), Lv D, Wang H, Zou J, Chen F, Yang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, West China Hospital,
Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.

The purpose of our study was to assess the safety and efficacy of recombinant
adenovirus-p53 (rAd-p53) combined with surgery and chemoradiotherapy (CRT) for
patients with hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas (HPSCC). This study
retrospectively and consecutively collected clinical data of 102 patients with
primary HPSCC who were admitted to the Department of Otolaryngology of West China
Hospital, Sichuan University in China between March 2010 and December 2015. A
retrospective clinical study of 102 patients with HPSCC was carried out from
March 2010 to December 2015. All patients were male and were divided into 3
groups based on the treatments they received, including Single Surgery, Surgery +
CRT, and Surgery + CRT + rAd-p53. In the Surgery + CRT + rAd-p53 group, rAd-p53
was intratumorally injected on the 1st day preoperatively; peritumorally injected
on the 7th day intraoperatively, and on the 21st, 28th, and 35th days
postoperatively. Their clinical data were retrospectively collected and analyzed.
In our study, for all 102 patients with HPSCC, 16 patients received Single
Surgery, 44 patients received Surgery + CRT therapy, and 42 patients received
Surgery + CRT + rAd-p53 therapy. In the Surgery + CRT + rAd-p53 group, all
patients could tolerate rAd-p53 treatment and no serious side effect was
observed. In addition, rAd-p53 application did not increase the side reactions
caused by surgery and CRT. Compared with the 3-year overall survival rates of
Single Surgery group and Surgery + CRT group, the 3-year overall survival rates
of Surgery + CRT + rAd-p53 group was significantly enhanced (P < .05). Similar
results were also observed for the 3-year disease-free survival rates. Our
results indicate that rAd-p53 therapy may improve the therapeutic effect of
patients with HPSCC, and is a safe and effective treatment method for patients
with HPSCC. However, further prospective studies with larger sample sizes are
needed to validate our findings.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000012193 
PMID: 30170471  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
