

2009. Gene Ther. 2011 Mar;18(3):275-82. doi: 10.1038/gt.2010.142. Epub 2010 Nov 4.

Adenoviral delivery of Tousled kinase for the protection of salivary glands
against ionizing radiation damage.

Palaniyandi S(1), Odaka Y, Green W, Abreo F, Caldito G, De Benedetti A,
Sunavala-Dossabhoy G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Louisiana State University
Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, LA 71130, USA.

Oral complications of salivary hypofunction often afflict cancer patients
undergoing radiotherapy for head and neck cancers. Dry mouth or xerostomia is an 
undesirable consequence of radiotherapy that compromises normal oral functions in
addition to causing odynophagia and increasing the patient's risk of oral
infections and dental caries. Radiation-induced xerostomia is irreversible, and
palliative measures to provide symptomatic relief remain the mainstay of
treatment. Previously, we identified a splice variant of a cellular kinase,
Tousled-like kinase 1B (TLK1B), which when overexpressed protects normal
epithelial cells against ionizing radiation (IR)-induced cell death. To address
the need to protect salivary glands in patients undergoing regional radiotherapy,
we investigated whether preemptive expression of TLK1B in salivary glands
protects against IR. In stably-derived salivary cell lines in vitro, TLK1B
expression increased cell survival after IR. Cells expressing exogenous TLK1B
were less radiosensitive (A5-TLK1B, α/β=0.67 Gy; ParC5-TLK1B, α/β=4.3 Gy)
compared to control cells (A5-BK, α/β=1.7 Gy; ParC5-BK, α/β=32.7 Gy). Using a
recombinant adenovirus serotype 5 viral vector for TLK1B gene transfer into rat
submandibular salivary glands in vivo, we demonstrated that TLK1B protects the
saliva-secreting acinar cells and better preserves salivary gland function
against IR relative to control glands. After a single fraction of 16 Gy, the
decline in salivary function at 8 weeks was less pronounced in TLK1B-treated
animals (40%) as compared to saline-treated controls (67%). Histopathological
analysis demonstrated increase in acinar atrophy, decrease in acinar cell number,
and increase in inflammatory infiltrate and fibrosis in irradiated control
tissues relative to TLK1B-treated glands. These results show the radioprotective 
benefits of TLK1B and implicate its usefulness in the management of regional
radiotherapy-induced xerostomia.

DOI: 10.1038/gt.2010.142 
PMID: 21048794  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
