

201. Curr Pharm Des. 2014;20(8):1274-92.

Disordered interactome of human papillomavirus.

Xue B, Ganti K, Rabionet A, Banks L, Uversky VN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of South Florida, 12901 Bruce B. 
Downs Blvd. MDC07, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA. vuversky@health.usf.edu.

Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) and proteins with long intrinsically
disordered protein regions (IDPRs) lack ordered structure but are involved in a
multitude of biological processes, where they often serve as major regulators and
controllers of various functions of their binding partners. Furthermore,
IDPs/IDPRs are often related to the pathogenesis of various diseases, including
cancer. Intrinsic disorder confers multiple functional advantages to its
carriers. As a result, due to their functional versatility and structural
plasticity, IDPs and IDPRs are common in various proteomes, including proteomes
of different pathological organisms. Viruses are "well-educated" users of various
aspects of intrinsic disorder for their advantage. These small but highly
efficient invaders broadly use intrinsic disorder to overrun the host organism's 
defense system, as well as to seize and overrun host systems and pathways forcing
them to work for the virus needs, to ensure accommodation of viruses to their
variable and often hostile habitats, and to promote and support the economic
usage of the viral genetic material. Human papillomaviruses (HPVs), with their
tiny proteomes (the entire HPV genome includes just eight open reading frames),
intricate life cycle, and ability to either cause benign papillomas/warts or
promote the development of carcinomas of the genital tract, head and neck and
epidermis, attracted considerable attention of researchers. This review analyzes 
the plentitude and demeanor of intrinsic disorder in proteins from HPVs and their
cellular targets.


PMID: 23713779  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
