

2010. Radiother Oncol. 2013 Sep;108(3):397-402. doi: 10.1016/j.radonc.2013.06.004. Epub
2013 Jul 3.

Human papillomaviruses and cancer.

Haedicke J(1), Iftner T.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Virology, Division of Experimental Virology, University Hospital
Tübingen, Germany.

Human papillomaviruses (HPV) are small oncogenic DNA viruses of which more than
200 types have been identified to date. A small subset of these is etiologically 
linked to the development of anogenital malignancies such as cervical cancer. In 
addition, recent studies established a causative relationship between these
high-risk HPV types and tonsillar and oropharyngeal cancer. Clinical management
of cervical cancer and head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs) is largely
standardized and involves surgical removal of the tumor tissue as well as
adjuvant chemoradiation therapy. Notably, the response to therapeutic
intervention of HPV-positive HNSCCs has been found to be better as compared to
HPV-negative tumors. Although the existing HPV vaccine is solely licensed for the
prevention of cervical cancer, it might also have prophylactic potential for the 
development of high-risk HPV-associated HNSCCs. Another group of viruses, which
belongs to the beta-HPV subgroup, has been implicated in nonmelanoma skin cancer,
however, the etiology remains to be established. Treatment of HPV-induced
nonmelanoma skin cancer is based on local excision. However, topically applied
immune-modulating substances represent non-surgical alternatives for the
management of smaller cutaneous tumors. In this review we present the current
knowledge of the role of HPV in cancer development and discuss clinical
management options as well as targets for the development of future intervention 
therapies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.radonc.2013.06.004 
PMID: 23830197  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
