

2012. AIDS. 2012 Jan 14;26(2):175-84. doi: 10.1097/QAD.0b013e32834ed8c8.

Prevalence of seroconversion symptoms and relationship to set-point viral load:
findings from a subtype C epidemic, 1995-2009.

Sullivan PS(1), Fideli U, Wall KM, Chomba E, Vwalika C, Kilembe W, Tichacek A,
Luisi N, Mulenga J, Hunter E, Boeras D, Allen S.

Author information: 
(1)Emory University Rollins School of Public Health, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.
pssulli@emory.edu

OBJECTIVE: To describe symptoms, physical examination findings, and set-point
viral load associated with acute HIV seroconversion in a heterosexual cohort of
HIV-discordant couples in Zambia.
DESIGN: We followed HIV serodiscordant couples in Lusaka, Zambia from 1995 to
2009 with HIV testing of negative partners and symptom inventories 3 monthly, and
physical examinations annually.
METHODS: We compared prevalence of self-reported or treated symptoms (malaria
syndrome, chronic diarrhea, asthenia, night sweats, and oral candidiasis) and
annual physical examination findings (unilateral or bilateral neck, axillary, or 
inguinal adenopathy; and dermatosis) in seroconverting vs. HIV-negative or
HIV-positive intervals, controlling for repeated observations, age, and sex. A
composite score comprised of significant symptoms and physical examination
findings predictive of seroconversion vs. HIV-negative intervals was constructed.
We modeled the relationship between number of symptoms and physical examination
findings at seroconversion and log set-point viral load using linear regression.
RESULTS: Two thousand, three hundred and eighty-eight HIV-negative partners were 
followed for a median of 18 months; 429 seroconversions occurred. Neither
symptoms nor physical examination findings were reported for most seroconverters.
Seroconversion was significantly associated with malaria syndrome among
nondiarrheic patients [adjusted odds ratio (aOR) = 4.0], night sweats (aOR =
1.4), and bilateral axillary (aOR = 1.6), inguinal (aOR = 2.2), and neck
(aOR = 2.2) adenopathy relative to HIV-negative intervals. Median number of
symptoms and findings was positively associated with set-point viral load
(P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Although most acute and early infections were asymptomatic, malaria
syndrome was more common and more severe during seroconversion. When present,
symptoms and physical examination findings were nonspecific and associated with
higher set-point viremia.

DOI: 10.1097/QAD.0b013e32834ed8c8 
PMCID: PMC3589587
PMID: 22089380  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
