

2013. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2014 Apr;72(4):823-8. doi: 10.1016/j.joms.2013.10.011.
Epub 2013 Nov 1.

Lymphoepithelial carcinoma--review of the treatment modalities and report of a
rare case in the sublingual gland.

Leiser Y(1), Peled M(2), Wolff A(3), El-Naaj IA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Instructor, Technion Faculty of Medicine, Ruth and Bruce Rappaport
Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel;
Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Rambam Medical Center, Haifa,
Israel. Electronic address: yleiser@gmail.com.
(2)Clinical Associate Professor, Technion Faculty of Medicine, Ruth and Bruce
Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa,
Israel; Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Rambam Medical Center,
Haifa, Israel.
(3)Oral and Maxillofacial Trainee, Rambam Medical Center, Haifa, Israel.
(4)Clinical Assistant Professor, Technion Faculty of Medicine, Ruth and Bruce
Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa,
Israel; Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Rambam Medical Center,
Haifa, Israel.

Controversies exist in the current literature regarding the treatment of
lymphoepithelial carcinoma (LEC). The presented study summaries the literature
controversies in the treatment of LEC and present a case of a rare LEC diagnosed 
in the sublingual gland of an otherwise healthy 21-year-old Arab woman. The
patient was admitted for swelling in the sublingual area. A biopsy indicated a
diagnosis of LEC of the sublingual gland. Treatment included a wide resection
with safe margins, marginal mandibulectomy, functional neck dissection, and a
radial forearm free flap for reconstruction. The patient received concomitant
radiotherapy and has remained disease free since her last follow-up. The
recommended primary treatment, based on the literature review, is primary
surgical excision with neck dissection and optional adjuvant radiotherapy to the 
gland area. Chemotherapy was not found to be beneficial according to the
literature.

Copyright Â© 2014 American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.joms.2013.10.011 
PMID: 24342577  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
