

2014. Int J Cancer. 2014 Apr 15;134(8):1907-15. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28512. Epub 2013 Oct
24.

Genetic variants in TNF-α promoter are predictors of recurrence in patients with 
squamous cell carcinoma of oropharynx after definitive radiotherapy.

Zhang C(1), Sturgis EM, Zheng H, Song X, Wei P, Jin L, Chao L, Wei Q, Li G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX; Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck
Surgery Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China.

The promoter variants of TNF-α, a major regulator of immune and inflammation
responses, have been implicated in cancer development and prognosis. Thus, we
investigated associations between four TNF-α promoter variants and risk of
recurrence of squamous cell carcinoma of the oropharynx (SCCOP). We evaluated
associations of four TNF-α polymorphisms with risk of recurrence in a cohort of
846 patients with SCCOP. Log-rank test and multivariable Cox models were used to 
evaluate associations. Compared with patients with variant genotypes of the TNF-α
-308 and TNF-α -863 polymorphisms, patients with common homozygous genotypes had 
worse disease-free survival (log-rank p = 0.0002 and p < 0.0001, respectively)
and increased risk of SCCOP recurrence (HR, 1.9, 95% CI, 1.3-2.8 and HR, 1.9, 95%
CI, 1.3-2.7, respectively) after multivariable adjustment. Furthermore, among
patients with HPV16-positive tumors, those with common homozygous genotypes of
the TNF-α -308 and -863 polymorphisms had worse disease-free survival (log-rank p
= 0.005 and p = 0.007, respectively) and higher recurrence risk than patients
with variant genotypes of these polymorphisms (HR, 5.1, 95% CI, 1.4-18.4 and HR, 
3.7, 95% CI, 1.5-9.1, respectively), while no such significant associations were 
found for TNF-α -857 or -1031 polymorphisms. Our findings suggest that TNF-α -308
and -863 polymorphisms may modulate the risk of SCCOP recurrence in patients with
HPV16-positive tumors. However, larger studies are needed to validate these
results.

© 2013 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.28512 
PMCID: PMC3947426
PMID: 24122460  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
