

2015. Hum Gene Ther. 2013 Jun;24(6):604-12. doi: 10.1089/hum.2012.235.

Recombinant AAV9-TLK1B administration ameliorates fractionated radiation-induced 
xerostomia.

Timiri Shanmugam PS(1), Dayton RD, Palaniyandi S, Abreo F, Caldito G, Klein RL,
Sunavala-Dossabhoy G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Health Sciences
Center-Shreveport, Louisiana State University, Shreveport, LA 71130, USA.

Salivary glands are highly susceptible to radiation, and patients with head and
neck cancer treated with radiotherapy invariably suffer from its distressing side
effect, salivary hypofunction. The reduction in saliva disrupts oral functions,
and significantly impairs oral health. Previously, we demonstrated that
adenoviral-mediated expression of Tousled-like kinase 1B (TLK1B) in rat
submandibular glands preserves salivary function after single-dose ionizing
radiation. To achieve long-term transgene expression for protection of salivary
gland function against fractionated radiation, this study examines the usefulness
of recombinant adeno-associated viral vector for TLK1B delivery. Lactated Ringers
or AAV2/9 with either TLK1B or GFP expression cassette were retroductally
delivered to rat submandibular salivary glands (10(11) vg/gland), and animals
were exposed, or not, to 20 Gy in eight fractions of 2.5 Gy/day. AAV2/9
transduced predominantly the ductal cells, including the convoluted granular
tubules of the submandibular glands. Transgene expression after virus delivery
could be detected within 5 weeks, and stable gene expression was observed till
the end of study. Pilocarpine-stimulated saliva output measured at 8 weeks after 
completion of radiation demonstrated >10-fold reduction in salivary flow in
saline- and AAV2/9-GFP-treated animals compared with the respective nonirradiated
groups (90.8% and 92.5% reduction in salivary flow, respectively). Importantly,
there was no decrease in stimulated salivary output after irradiation in animals 
that were pretreated with AAV2/9-TLK1B (121.5% increase in salivary flow;
p<0.01). Salivary gland histology was better preserved after irradiation in
TLK1B-treated group, though not significantly, compared with control groups.
Single preemptive delivery of AAV2/9-TLK1B averts salivary dysfunction resulting 
from fractionated radiation. Although AAV2/9 transduces mostly the ductal cells
of the gland, their protection against radiation assists in preserving
submandibular gland function. AAV2/9-TLK1B treatment could prove beneficial in
attenuating xerostomia in patients with head and neck cancer undergoing
radiotherapy.

DOI: 10.1089/hum.2012.235 
PMCID: PMC3689188
PMID: 23614651  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
