

2016. Mod Rheumatol. 2009;19(6):675-80. doi: 10.1007/s10165-009-0204-y. Epub 2009 Jul
17.

A case of extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type mimicking typical
manifestations of adult-onset Still's disease (AOSD) with hemophagocytic
syndrome: diagnostic consideration between malignant lymphoma without
lymphadenopathy and AOSD.

Kato T(1), Tanabe J, Kanemoto M, Kobayashi C, Morita S, Karahashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Fujieda Municipal General Hospital, 4-1-11
Surugadai, Fujieda, 426-8677, Japan. kintarou@s9.dion.ne.jp

A 25-year-old Japanese man was suffering from high fever, sore throat,
arthralgia, and macular salmon-pink eruption. The superficial lymph node was not 
palpable, and computed tomographic scans from the neck to pelvis demonstrated
hepatosplenomegaly without apparent lymphadenopathy. Therefore, the possibility
of malignant lymphoma was considered to be extremely low. Serology for Epstein
Barr virus (EBV) and cytomegalovirus showed a postinfectious state, and blood
culture was negative. Serum rheumatoid factor and antinuclear antibody were
negative. Leukocytopenia (2.4 x 10(3)/mul) was observed, and thus a diagnosis of 
adult-onset Still's disease (AOSD) with hemophagocytic syndrome (HPS) was made.
Fifty-five milligrams of prednisolone daily improved his symptoms and
leukocytopenia promptly, but high fever with severe and progressive
thrombocytopenia occurred 12 days later. Bone marrow aspiration revealed the
presence of lymphoma cells and hemophagocytosis, and the CD45 gating analysis
showed expanding population of CD2(+), CD3(-), and CD56(+) cells. Further,
mucosal ulceration in the nasal cavity was detected. Therefore, a diagnosis of
extranodal natural killer (NK)/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type, concomitant with HPS 
was made, and treatment with dexamethasone, etoposide, ifosfamide, carboplatin
(DeVIC) regimen ameliorated his symptoms and platelet transfusion dependency.
Later, a high titer of serum EBV-DNA was detected, which supported the diagnosis.
Diagnosing AOSD, extranodal presentation of malignant lymphoma such as extranodal
NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type, should be carefully considered.

DOI: 10.1007/s10165-009-0204-y 
PMID: 19609486  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
