

2025. Cancer. 2017 Jun 15;123(12):2219-2229. doi: 10.1002/cncr.30588. Epub 2017 Mar 27.

Human papillomavirus in cervical cancer and oropharyngeal cancer: One cause, two 
diseases.

Berman TA(1)(2), Schiller JT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
(2)Laboratory of Cellular Oncology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) causes greater than 5% of cancers worldwide, including
all cervical cancers and an alarmingly increasing proportion of oropharyngeal
cancers (OPCs). Despite markedly reduced cervical cancer incidence in
industrialized nations with organized screening programs, cervical cancer remains
the second most common cause of death from cancer in women worldwide, as
developing countries lack resources for universal, high-quality screening. In the
United States, HPV-related OPC is only 1 of 5 cancers with a rising incidence
since 1975 and now has taken over the cervix as the most common site of
HPV-related cancer. Similar trends follow throughout North America and Europe.
The need for early detection and prevention is paramount. Despite the common
etiologic role of HPV in the development of cervical cancer and HPV-associated
OPC, great disparity exists between incidence, screening modalities (or lack
thereof), treatment, and prevention in these 2 very distinct cohorts. These
differences in cervical cancer and HPV-associated OPC and their impact are
discussed here. Cancer 2017;123:2219-2229. Â© 2017 American Cancer Society.

Published 2017. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public
domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.30588 
PMID: 28346680  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
