

204. Cir Cir. 2010 May-Jun;78(3):221-8.

Human papilloma virus in patients with epidermoid head and neck carcinoma: a
prognostic factor?

[Article in English, Spanish]

Flores-de la Torre C(1), Hernández-Hernández DM, Gallegos-Hernández JF.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Oncología Médica, Hospital de Oncología, Centro Médico
Nacional Siglo XXI, Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social, México, D. F., Mexico.

BACKGROUND: The three most important prognostic factors in patients with head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) are tumor size, nodular histological
condition and tumor origin. Recently, human papilloma virus (HPV), particularly
HPV-16, has been acknowledged as a prognostic factor. HPV+ patients have better
survival than HPV-. This has created a controversy because other factors may
influence the prognosis. The objective of this study was to investigate whether
HPV has prognostic value in patients with HNSCC.
METHODS: We carried out a retrospective evaluation of patients with HNSCC and the
following variables were analyzed: survival, tumor location, stage, general
condition according to Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) status,
treatment and HPV association identified by PCR. We used a descriptive analysis
of simple frequencies and central tendency and dispersion measures according to
the type of variables. We used descriptive analysis for overall survival with
Kaplan- Meier and Cox regression with 95% confidence interval.
RESULTS: There were 179 patients included: 119 (66.5%) were male. Average age of 
patients was 64 years; 34% of the tumors were located in the oral cavity and 33% 
were located in the larynx. Factors associated with survival were ECOG (RR =
11.3; 2.6-48), clinical stage (RR = 7.8; 1.7-34), age >70 years (RR = 3.5,
1.4-8.5) and nonsurgical treatment (RR = 2.3; 1.4-3.8). Average overall survival 
for patients with HPV16 was 22 months vs. 28 months in those with other types of 
viruses. HPV infection was not associated with the prognosis in this series.
CONCLUSIONS: ECOG at the time of the diagnosis and clinical stage were the most
significant prognostic factors in this series. HPV did not show any prognostic
value.


PMID: 20642905  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
