

2040. Eur J Cancer Prev. 2016 Nov;25(6):558-71. doi: 10.1097/CEJ.0000000000000207.

Human papillomavirus infection by anatomical site among Greek men and women: a
systematic review.

Tsikis S(1), Hoefer L, Charnot-Katsikas A, Schneider JA.

Author information: 
(1)aPritzker School of Medicine, University of Chicago Departments of bPathology 
cMedicine and Public Health Sciences, University of Chicago Medicine, Chicago,
Illinois, USA.

We systematically reviewed the literature on anal, penile, cervical, and
oropharyngeal human papillomavirus (HPV) infection in Greece to provide a
comprehensive overview of HPV prevalence and to explore the reporting of HPV in
Greek men and women. A total of five databases, including PubMed and Scopus, were
searched up until 1 January 2015 for studies looking at HPV prevalence,
incidence, or risk factors by anatomical site. We identified 50 eligible studies 
for inclusion. The majority of them were cervical studies (n=26) followed by head
and neck studies (n=13) with only two studies exclusively focusing on anal sites 
and two on penile sites. The remaining studies examined prevalence from multiple 
sites. Most studies looked at small, high-risk populations, and HPV prevalence
ranged from 2.5-43.4% for cervical studies; 0-91% for head and neck studies;
54.6-78.4% for anal studies; and 20.3-66.7% for penile studies. Age, smoking, and
number of sexual partners were the commonly assessed risk factors. There were
significant sex and anatomic site disparities in the reporting of HPV prevalence.
Given the relationship between HPV infection and the increasing incidence of anal
cancer in men, more research is needed to reveal the prevalence of HPV at these
sites in Greek men, especially given the reports of the declining health of the
Greek population.

DOI: 10.1097/CEJ.0000000000000207 
PMCID: PMC4884171
PMID: 26628088  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
