
Conflict of interest statement: The authors of this review have no conflicts of
interest to report.


2041. J Oral Pathol Med. 2014 Sep;43(8):593-9. doi: 10.1111/jop.12175. Epub 2014 May 9.

Anterior tongue cancer with no history of tobacco and alcohol use may be a
distinct molecular and clinical entity.

Sebastian P(1), Babu JM, Prathibha R, Hariharan R, Pillai MR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Surgical Oncology, Regional Cancer Centre, Thiruvananthapuram,
India.

BACKGROUND: A small, albeit significant, number of head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) patients has no history of tobacco and alcohol use. Such
non-habits associated HNSCCs may represent a distinct clinical entity and exhibit
increased aggressiveness. The objective of the study was to understand
differences in molecular etiology of habits, and non-habits associated tongue
carcinomas.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: High-throughput gene expression profiling of 22 tumor
samples was carried out. This was followed by quantitative real-time PCR
validation of four of the identified differentially expressed genes.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: Eighteen genes were identified that correlate strongly
with the habits- and non-habits distinction. Among the genes significantly
overexpressed in the non-habits group are CCND1, a key cell-cycle regulator,
DACT3, a modulator of the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway, and three genes associated
with the Notch signaling pathway. CCND1 and DACT3 overexpression in non-habits
associated tongue carcinomas were subsequently validated by quantitative
real-time PCR in an independent cohort (n = 18) of patient samples. Gene
expression data were integrated with publicly available protein interaction data 
to build a small protein interaction network containing five of 18 differentially
expressed genes. This suggested that a functional 'network module' can be
implicated in the subgroup distinction. All the tumors analyzed here were human
papillomavirus (HPV) negative samples. An association between CCND1
overexpression in oral tumors and poor prognosis has previously been reported.
Thus, CCND1 overexpression in non-habits associated anterior tongue carcinomas
may contribute to their increased clinical aggressiveness.

Â© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jop.12175 
PMID: 24809775  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
