

2042. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2011 Sep;4(9):1378-84. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-11-0284. Epub 2011 Aug 11.

Associations between oral HPV16 infection and cytopathology: evaluation of an
oropharyngeal "pap-test equivalent" in high-risk populations.

Fakhry C(1), Rosenthal BT, Clark DP, Gillison ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA. mauragillison@osumc.edu

Human papillomavirus (HPV) is responsible for the rising incidence of
oropharyngeal squamous cell cancers (OSCC) in the United States, and yet, no
screening strategies have been evaluated. Secondary prevention by means of HPV
detection and cervical cytology has led to a decline in cervical cancer incidence
in the United States. Here, we explored an analogous strategy by evaluating
associations between HPV16 infection, cytopathology, and histopathology in two
populations at elevated risk for OSCCs. In the first, a cross-sectional study
population (PAP1), cytology specimens were collected by means of brush biopsy
from patients presenting with oropharyngeal abnormalities. In the second (PAP2), 
a nested case-control study, bilateral tonsillar cytology samples were collected 
at 12-month intervals from HIV-infected individuals. The presence of
cytopathologic abnormality in HPV16-positive tonsil brush biopsies (cases) was
compared with HPV16-negative samples (controls) matched on age and gender. HPV16 
was detected in samples by consensus primer PCR and/or type-specific PCR.
Univariate logistic regression was used to evaluate associations. In PAP1, HPV16 
alone (OR: 6.1, 95% CI: 1.6-22.7) or in combination with abnormal cytology (OR:
20, 95% CI: 4.2-95.4) was associated with OSCC. In PAP2, 4.7% (72 of 1,524) of
tonsillar cytology specimens from HIV-infected individuals without oropharyngeal 
abnormalities were HPV16 positive. Tonsillar HPV16 infection was not associated
with atypical squamous cells of unknown significance (ASCUS), the only cytologic 
abnormality identified. Therefore, HPV16 was associated with OSCCs among
individuals with accessible oropharyngeal lesions but not with cytologic evidence
of dysplasia among high-risk individuals without such lesions. An oropharyngeal
Pap-test equivalent may not be feasible, likely due to limitations in sampling
the relevant tonsillar crypt epithelium.

Â©2011 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-11-0284 
PMCID: PMC3380432
PMID: 21836021  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
