

2043. J Clin Oncol. 2010 Jan 1;28(1):8-14. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2009.23.0425. Epub 2009 Nov
16.

Induction chemotherapy and cetuximab for locally advanced squamous cell carcinoma
of the head and neck: results from a phase II prospective trial.

Kies MS(1), Holsinger FC, Lee JJ, William WN Jr, Glisson BS, Lin HY, Lewin JS,
Ginsberg LE, Gillaspy KA, Massarelli E, Byers L, Lippman SM, Hong WK, El-Naggar
AK, Garden AS, Papadimitrakopoulou V.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology, Head and Neck Surgery,
Radiation Oncology, Biostatistics, Radiology, and Pathology, The University of
Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. mkies@mdanderson.org

PURPOSE To determine the potential efficacy of combining cetuximab with
chemotherapy in patients with advanced nodal disease, we conducted a phase II
trial with induction chemotherapy (ICT) consisting of six weekly cycles of
paclitaxel 135 mg/m(2) and carboplatin (area under the curve = 2) with cetuximab 
400 mg/m(2) in week 1 and then 250 mg/m(2) (PCC). PATIENTS AND METHODS
Forty-seven previously untreated patients (41 with oropharynx primaries; 33 men, 
14 women; median age, 53 years; performance status of 0 or 1) with squamous cell 
carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN; T1-4, N2b/c/3) were treated and evaluated 
for clinical and radiographic response. After ICT, patients underwent risk-based 
local therapy, which consisted of either radiation, concomitant
chemoradiotherapy, or surgery, based on tumor stage and site at diagnosis.
Results After induction PCC, nine patients (19%) achieved a complete response,
and 36 patients (77%) achieved a partial response. The most common grade 3 or 4
toxicity was skin rash (45%), followed by neutropenia (21%) without fever. At a
median follow-up time of 33 months, locoregional or systemic disease progression 
was observed in six patients. The 3-year progression-free survival (PFS) and
overall survival (OS) rates were 87% (95% CI, 78% to 97%) and 91% (95% CI, 84% to
99%), respectively. Human papillomavirus (HPV) 16, found in 12 (46%) of 26
biopsies, was associated with improved PFS (P = .012) and OS (P = .046).
CONCLUSION ICT with weekly PCC followed by risk-based local therapy seems to be
feasible, effective, and well tolerated. PFS is promising, and this sequential
treatment strategy should be further investigated. Patients with HPV-positive
tumors have an excellent prognosis.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2009.23.0425 
PMCID: PMC2799235
PMID: 19917840  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
