

2044. Int J Mol Sci. 2017 Dec 19;18(12). pii: E2752. doi: 10.3390/ijms18122752.

Coinfection with Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV), Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) and
Polyoma BK Virus (BKPyV) in Laryngeal, Oropharyngeal and Oral Cavity Cancer.

Drop B(1), Strycharz-Dudziak M(2), Kliszczewska E(3), Polz-Dacewicz M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Information Technology and Medical Statistics, Medical
University of Lublin, 20-059 Lublin, Poland. bartlomiej.drop@umlub.pl.
(2)Chair and Department of Conservative Dentistry with Endodontics, Medical
University of Lublin, 20-059 Lublin, Poland.
malgorzata.strycharz-dudziak@umlub.pl.
(3)Department of Virology, Medical University of Lublin, 20-059 Lublin, Poland.
ewakliszczewska@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Virology, Medical University of Lublin, 20-059 Lublin, Poland.
m.polz@umlub.pl.

Most research providing evidence for the role of oncogenic viruses in head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) development is focused on one type of virus
without analyzing possible interactions between two or more types of viruses. The
aim of this study was to analyse the prevalence of co-infection with human
papillomavirus (HPV), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and polyoma BK virus (BKPyV) in
oral, oropharyngeal and laryngeal squamous cell carcinomas in Polish patients.
The correlations between viral infection, SCC, demographic parameters, evidence
of metastases and grading were also investigated. Fresh-frozen tumour tissue
samples were collected from 146 patients with laryngeal, oropharyngeal and oral
cancer. After DNA extraction, the DNA of the studied viruses was detected using
polymerase chain rection (PCR) assay. Males (87.7%) with a history of smoking
(70.6%) and alcohol abuse (59.6%) prevailed in the studied group. Histological
type G2 was recognized in 64.4% cases. The patients were most frequently
diagnosed with T2 stage (36.3%) and with N1 stage (45.8%). Infection with at
least two viruses was detected in 56.2% of patients. In this group, co-infection 
with HPV/EBV was identified in 34.1% of cases, EBV/BKV in 23.2%, HPV/BKV in
22.0%, and HPV/EBV/BKV in 20.7%. No difference of multiple infection in different
locations of cancer was observed. The prevalence of poorly differentiated tumours
(G3) was more frequent in co-infection with all three viruses than EBV or BKV
alone. A significant correlation was observed between tumour dimensions (T) and
lymph-node involvement (N) in co-infected patients compared to single infection. 
Further studies are necessary to clarify whether co-infection plays an important 
role in the initiation and/or progression of oncogenic transformation of oral,
oropharyngeal and laryngeal epithelial cells.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms18122752 
PMCID: PMC5751351
PMID: 29257122  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
