

2047. Diagn Pathol. 2013 Jun 19;8:100. doi: 10.1186/1746-1596-8-100.

Acute EBV infection masquerading as "In-situ Follicular Lymphoma": a pitfall in
the differential diagnosis of this entity.

Gru AA(1), Kreisel F, Duncavage E, Nguyen TT, Hassan A, Frater JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, 660 S, Euclid Avenue, Box 8118, St, Louis, MO 63110, USA.
jfrater@path.wustl.edu.

We present the case of a 30 year-old man who was referred for evaluation of
diffuse lymphadenopathy. Six weeks prior, he noticed darkening of his urine
associated with pale stools, nausea and an eventual 30 lb weight loss within a
month. The initial laboratory findings showed elevation of the liver enzymes. A
CT scan showed mesenteric and periaortic lymphadenopathy with the largest lymph
node measuring 2.8 cm. Other laboratory results were otherwise unremarkable
(including a normal LDH) with the exception of positive serum antibodies against 
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) associated antigens (IgM+ and IgG+). An excisional
biopsy of 4 of the small neck lymph nodes showed a normal architecture with
prominent follicles and an intact capsule. But, by immunohistochemistry two of
the follicles showed aberrant coexpression of BCL-2, in addition to CD10 and
BCL-6. In-situ hybridization for early Epstein-Barr virus mRNA (EBER) and
immunohistochemistry for latent membrane protein-1 (LMP-1) stained both scattered
positive cells, as well as BCL-2 positive B-cells. Although an original diagnosis
of in-situ follicular lymphoma was favored at an outside facility, additional
interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) studies for
t(14;18);(IGH-BCL2) rearrangement (performed on the BCL-2 + follicles
microdissected from the tissue block; Abott probe dual colour fusion) and
molecular studies (IGH gene rearrangement by PCR, also performed on the
microdissected follicles) were negative. Serologic studies (positive EBV
antibodies) and immunostains in conjunction with the molecular studies confirmed 
the reactive nature of the changes. Our case also shows direct immunopathogenic
evidence of BCL-2 expression among the EBV-infected cells, which has to our
knowledge not been previously documented in vivo. A diagnosis of EBV infection
should, therefore, be considered when confronted with BCL-2 expression in
germinal centers, particularly in younger individuals, as the diagnosis of FLIS
may lead to extensive and invasive haematologic work-ups.VIRTUAL SLIDES: The
virtual slide(s) for this article can be found here:
http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/1323656318940068.

DOI: 10.1186/1746-1596-8-100 
PMCID: PMC3874606
PMID: 23782909  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
