

2050. Am J Pathol. 2014 Dec;184(12):3376-83. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2014.08.004. Epub
2014 Nov 22.

Profiling of expression of human papillomavirus-related cancer miRNAs in penile
squamous cell carcinomas.

Barzon L(1), Cappellesso R(2), Peta E(1), Militello V(3), Sinigaglia A(4), Fassan
M(2), Simonato F(2), Guzzardo V(2), Ventura L(5), Blandamura S(2), Gardiman M(2),
Palù G(1), Fassina A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Padua, Padua, Italy.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Padua, Padua, Italy.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Padua, Padua, Italy; Virology 
Unit, Parma University Hospital, Parma, Italy.
(4)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Padua, Padua, Italy; Veneto
Region Oncology Institute (Istituto Oncologico Veneto-IRCCS), Padua, Italy.
(5)Department of Statistical Sciences, University of Padua, Padua, Italy.
(6)Department of Medicine, University of Padua, Padua, Italy. Electronic address:
ambrogio.fassina@unipd.it.

Penile squamous cell carcinoma (PSCC) is a rare tumor associated with high-risk
human papillomavirus (HR-HPV) infection in 30% to 60% of cases. Altered
expression of miRNAs has been reported in HPV-related cervical and head and neck 
cancers, but such data have not been available for PSCC. We analyzed a series of 
59 PSCCs and 8 condylomata for presence of HPV infection, for p16(INK4a), Ki-67, 
and p53 immunohistochemical expression, and for expression of a panel of cellular
miRNAs (let-7c, miR-23b, miR-34a, miR-145, miR-146a, miR-196a, and miR-218)
involved in HPV-related cancer. HR-HPV DNA (HPV16 in most cases) was detected in 
17/59 (29%) PSCCs; all penile condylomata (8/8) were positive for low-risk HPV6
or HPV11. HR-HPV(+) PSCCs overexpressed p16(INK4a) in 88% cases and p53 in 35% of
cases, whereas HR-HPV(-) PSCCs were positive for p16(INK4a) and p53
immunostaining in 9% and 44% of cases, respectively. Among the miRNAs
investigated, expression of miR-218 was lower in PSCCs with HR-HPV infection and 
in p53(-) cancers. Hypermethylation of the promoter of the SLIT2 gene, which
contains miR-218-1 in its intronic region, was frequently observed in PSCCs,
mainly in those with low miR-218 expression. Epigenetic silencing of miR-218 is a
common feature in HR-HPV(+) PSCCs and in HR-HPV(-) PSCCs without
immunohistochemical detection of p53.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2014.08.004 
PMID: 25455689  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
