

2052. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35522. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035522. Epub 2012 Apr 16.

Association of combined p73 and p53 genetic variants with tumor HPV16-positive
oropharyngeal cancer.

Wang Z(1), Sturgis EM, Guo W, Song X, Zhang F, Xu L, Wei Q, Li G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America.

p53 and p73 interact with human papillomavirus (HPV) E6 and E7 oncoproteins. The 
interplay between p53 and p73 and HPV16 may lead to deregulation of cell cycle
and apoptosis, through which inflammation/immune responses control the HPV
clearance and escape of immune surveillance, and subsequently contribute to tumor
HPV16 status. In this case-case comparison study, HPV16 status in tumor specimens
was analyzed and p53 codon 72 and p73 G4C14-to-A4T14 polymorphisms were genotyped
using genomic DNA from blood of 309 oropharyngeal cancer patients. Odds ratios
(ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs) were calculated in univariate and
multivariable logistic regression models to examine the association. The results 
from this study showed both p53 variant genotypes (Arg/Pro+Pro/Pro) and p73
variant genotypes (GC/AT+AT/AT) were significantly associated with HPV16-positive
tumor in oropharyngeal cancer patients (OR, 1.9, 95% CI, 1.1-3.3 and OR, 2.1, 95%
CI, 1.2-3.8, respectively), while the combined variant genotypes (p53 Pro
carriers and p73 AT carriers) exhibited a significantly greater association with 
HPV16-positive tumor (OR, 3.2, 95% CI, 1.4-7.4), compared with combined wild-type
genotypes (p53 Arg/Arg and p73 GC/GC), and the association was in a statistically
significant dose-effect relationship (p = 0.001). Moreover, such association was 
more pronounced among several subgroups. These findings suggest that variant
genotypes of p53 and p73 genes may be individually, or more likely jointly,
associated with tumor HPV16-positive oropharyngeal cancer patients, particularly 
in never smokers. Identification of such susceptible biomarkers would greatly
influence on individualized treatment for an improved prognosis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035522 
PMCID: PMC3327667
PMID: 22523600  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
