

2064. Oncol Rep. 2015 Feb;33(2):942-50. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3664. Epub 2014 Dec 10.

miR-23a promotes cisplatin chemoresistance and protects against cisplatin-induced
apoptosis in tongue squamous cell carcinoma cells through Twist.

Peng F(1), Zhang H(2), Du Y(3), Tan P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Xiangya Hospital, Central 
South University, Changsha, Hunan, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Hunan Provincial Tumor Hospital,
Changsha, Hunan, P.R.Â China.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Loudi Central Hospital,
Loudi, Hunan, P.R. China.

Tongue squamous cell carcinoma (TSCC) is one of the most common head and neck
cancers. Cisplatin is effective as a single agent or in combination with other
drugs for the treatment of TSCC. Treatment with cisplatin-based chemotherapy has 
been found to improve the prognosis of patients with TSCC. However, one of the
most important clinical issues of cisplatin-based TSCC chemotherapy is the
intrinsic/acquired chemoresistance to cisplatin. Increased expression of miR-23a 
reportedly promotes cisplatin chemoresistance in TSCC cells. High expression of
Twist is also associated with cancer chemoresistance and poor prognosis of TSCC
patients. In the present study, we explored the interaction between miR-23a and
Twist in TSCC cells, and assessed its impact on TSCC chemoresistance to
cisplatin. miR-23a and/or Twist were overexpressed or knocked down in SCC-4 and
Tca8113 human TSCC cells. The expression levels of miR-23a and Twist were
determined. The half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) of cisplatin and
cell apoptosis rate under cisplatin treatment were used as measures of cisplatin 
chemoresistance. Overexpression of miR-23a in both SCC-4 and Tca8113 cells
markedly increased Twist expression, c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) activity and
the half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) of cisplain, and decreased
cisplatin-induced apoptosis, all of which was abolished by knockdown of Twist or 
selective JNK inhibitor SP600125. On the other hand, knockdown of miR-23a
significantly decreased Twist expression, JNK activity and IC50 of cisplain, and 
increased cisplatin-induced apoptosis, all of which was completely reversed by
overexpression of Twist. In conclusion, the present study for the first time
demonstrates that miR-23a promotes cisplatin chemoresistance and protects
cisplatin-induced apoptosis in TSCC cells through inducing Twist expression by a 
JNK-dependent mechanism. It adds new insights into the molecular mechanisms
underlying TSCC chemoresistance.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2014.3664 
PMID: 25501015  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
