

2069. Ann Oncol. 2010 Oct;21(10):1961-6. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdq210. Epub 2010 Apr 27.

p16 expression in oropharyngeal cancer: its impact on staging and prognosis
compared with the conventional clinical staging parameters.

Fischer CA(1), Kampmann M, Zlobec I, Green E, Tornillo L, Lugli A, Wolfensberger 
M, Terracciano LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital,
Petersgraben 4, Basel, Switzerland. cfischer@uhbs.ch

BACKGROUND: Currently, staging of head neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is on
the basis of primary tumor extension (cT), lymph node involvement (cN) and
distant metastasis (cM). The aim of cancer staging was to improve diagnosis,
prognosis and to compare outcome results. A new subgroup of oropharyngeal
squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) induced by human papillomavirus (HPV) infection
is reported to show an increasing incidence. These HPV-positive OPSCC show
distinct molecular differences, specific p16 overexpression and a significantly
better prognosis. Therefore, the aim of this study was to evaluate the prognostic
influence of p16 expression in OPSCC and compare its relevance with the
established prognostic markers cT and cN classification and the clinical stages
I-IV.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Immunohistochemistry for p16 was carried out on the basis
of a tissue microarray including 102 OPSCC patients with corresponding
retrospective clinicopathological and follow-up data.
RESULTS: p16 is the strongest independent prognostic marker in OPSCC, surpassing 
the significance of cT and cN classification as well as the clinical stages I-IV.
Prognosis of p16-positive OPSCC of an advanced stage reached or even exceeded
prognosis of the next clinically smaller conventionally staged group of tumors.
CONCLUSION: p16 is the most relevant prognostic marker in OPSCC and should be
considered for inclusion into the official staging system of HNSCC.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mdq210 
PMID: 20423915  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
