

2071. Hum Pathol. 2011 Oct;42(10):1385-90. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2010.12.013. Epub
2011 Mar 30.

Immunohistochemistry for Merkel cell polyomavirus is highly specific but not
sensitive for the diagnosis of Merkel cell carcinoma in the Australian
population.

Paik JY(1), Hall G, Clarkson A, Lee L, Toon C, Colebatch A, Chou A, Gill AJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Anatomical Pathology, Royal North Shore Hospital, Sydney,
2065 Australia.

Recent studies have demonstrated a high frequency of detection of Merkel cell
polyomavirus in Merkel cell carcinoma. However, most of these studies are from
European or North American centers that have relatively low sun exposure and may 
have a higher incidence of virus-driven oncogenesis compared with the highly
sun-exposed but predominantly fair-skinned Australian population. We performed
immunohistochemistry for Merkel cell polyomavirus on 104 cases of Merkel cell
carcinoma and 74 cases of noncutaneous small cell-undifferentiated carcinoma from
3 major Australian centers. Nineteen (18.3%) cases of Merkel cell carcinoma
showed positive staining for Merkel cell polyomavirus versus 1 (1.3%) of small
cell-undifferentiated carcinoma. All 15 cases (14.3%) of Merkel cell carcinoma
with areas of mixed squamous differentiation showed negative staining. We found
positive staining in only 3 (7.7%) of 39 Merkel cell carcinoma from the head and 
neck (the most sun-exposed area) versus 16 (24.6%) of 65 of tumors from other
sites (P < .05). Our findings support the concept of a Merkel cell
polyomavirus-driven and a non-Merkel cell polyomavirus-driven (primarily
sun-dependent) pathway in Merkel cell carcinoma carcinogenesis, with the latter
being significantly more frequent in Australia and in mixed squamous-Merkel cell 
carcinoma (which is also more frequent in Australia). Although
immunohistochemistry for Merkel cell polyomavirus seems to be highly specific in 
all populations, the low incidence of Merkel cell polyomavirus-positive Merkel
cell carcinoma in a highly sun-exposed population limits its diagnostic utility
in this setting.

Crown Copyright Â© 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2010.12.013 
PMID: 21453956  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
