

2078. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 21;9(4):e95364. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095364. eCollection
2014.

Human papillomavirus and cystic node metastasis in oropharyngeal cancer and
cancer of unknown primary origin.

Yasui T(1), Morii E(2), Yamamoto Y(1), Yoshii T(1), Takenaka Y(1), Nakahara S(1),
Todo T(3), Inohara H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Osaka University
Faculty of Medicine, Suita, Osaka, Japan.
(2)Department of Pathology, Osaka University Faculty of Medicine, Suita, Osaka,
Japan.
(3)Department of Radiation Biology and Medical Genetics, Osaka University Faculty
of Medicine, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(12):e116030.

The clinical significance of human papillomavirus (HPV) in neck node metastasis
from cancer of unknown primary (CUP) is not well established. We aimed to address
the relationship of HPV status between node metastasis and the primary tumor, and
also the relevance of HPV status regarding radiographically detected cystic node 
metastasis in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) and CUP. HPV DNA was 
examined in 68 matched pairs of node metastasis and primary tumor, and in node
metastasis from 27 CUPs. In surgically treated CUPs, p16 was examined
immunohistochemically. When tonsillectomy proved occult tonsillar cancer in CUP, 
HPV DNA and p16 were also examined in the occult primary. Cystic node metastasis 
on contrast-enhanced computed tomography scans was correlated with the primary
site and HPV status in another series of 255 HNSCCs and CUPs with known HPV
status. Node metastasis was HPV-positive in 19/37 (51%) oropharyngeal SCCs
(OPSCCs) and 10/27 (37%) CUPs, but not in non-OPSCCs. Fluid was collected from
cystic node metastasis using fine needle aspiration in two OPSCCs and one CUP,
and all fluid collections were HPV-positive. HPV status, including the presence
of HPV DNA, genotype, and physical status, as well as the expression pattern of
p16 were consistent between node metastasis and primary or occult primary tumor. 
Occult tonsillar cancer was found more frequently in p16-positive CUP than in
p16-negative CUP (odds ratio (OR), 39.0; 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.4-377.8;
P = 0.02). Radiographically, cystic node metastasis was specific to OPSCC and
CUP, and was associated with HPV positivity relative to necrotic or solid node
metastasis (OR, 6.2; 95% CI, 1.2-45.7; P = 0.03). In conclusion, HPV status
remains unchanged after metastasis. The occult primary of HPV-positive CUP is
most probably localized in the oropharynx. HPV status determined from fine needle
aspirates facilitates the diagnosis of cystic node metastasis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095364 
PMCID: PMC3994055
PMID: 24752007  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
