

208. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2015 Sep;95(3):397-406. doi:
10.1016/j.critrevonc.2015.03.005. Epub 2015 Apr 18.

Integrating genomics in head and neck cancer treatment: Promises and pitfalls.

Thariat J(1), Vignot S(2), Lapierre A(3), Falk AT(4), Guigay J(5), Van
Obberghen-Schilling E(6), Milano G(7).

Author information: 
(1)Oncopharmacology Unit EA 3836, Centre A. Lacassagne, 33 Av de Valombrose,
06189 Nice, France; Department of Radiation Oncology, Centre A. Lacassagne, 33 Av
de Valombrose, 06189 Nice, France. Electronic address: jthariat@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Oncology and Hematology-Hôpitaux de Chartres, 6 rue Claude
Bernard, 28630 Chartres Le Coudray, France.
(3)Service d'Oncologie Radiothérapie, Centre Hospitalier Lyon Sud, Hospices
Civils de Lyon Université Claude Bernard, Lyon 69008, France.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, Centre A. Lacassagne, 33 Av de Valombrose,
06189 Nice, France.
(5)Department of Medical Oncology, Centre A. Lacassagne, 33 Av de Valombrose,
06189 Nice, France.
(6)University of Nice Sophia Antipolis-CNRSUMR7277-InsermU1091, Parc Valrose,
06108 Nice, France.
(7)Oncopharmacology Unit EA 3836, Centre A. Lacassagne, 33 Av de Valombrose,
06189 Nice, France.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) represent a multifactorial disease
of poor prognosis. They have lagged behind other cancers in terms of personalized
therapy. With expansion and high throughput sequencing methods, recent landmark
exonic studies and Cancer Genome Atlas data have identified genes relevant to
carcinogenesis and cancer progression. Mutational profiles and rates vary widely 
depending on exposure to carcinogens, anatomic subsites and human papilloma virus
(HPV) infection. Tumors may exhibit specific, tissue-specific, not exclusively
HPV-related, gene alterations, such those observed in oral cavity cancers in Asia
or Occident. Except for the PI3K pathway, the rate of mutations in HPV+ cancers
is much lower than in tobacco/alcohol-related cancers. Somatic driver mutation
analyses show that relatively few driver genes are druggable in HNSCC and that
tumor suppressor gene alterations prevail. More mature for therapeutic
applications is the oncogenic PI3K pathway, with preclinical human xenograft
models suggesting that PI3KCA pathway mutations may be used as predictive
biomarkers and clinical data showing efficacy of mTOR/Akt inhibitors. Therapeutic
guidance, to date, relies on classical histoprognostic factors, anatomic subsite 
and HPV status, with integration of hierarchized supervised mutational profiling 
to provide additional therapeutic options in advanced HNSCC in a near future.
Unsupervised controlled genomic analyses remain necessary to unravel potentially 
relevant genes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2015.03.005 
PMID: 25979769  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
