

2095. Chin J Cancer. 2012 Mar;31(3):142-9. doi: 10.5732/cjc.011.10279. Epub 2012 Jan 9.

Detecting plasma Epstein-Barr virus DNA to diagnose postradiation nasopharyngeal 
skull base lesions in nasopharyngeal carcinoma patients: a prospective study.

Liang FY(1), Sun W, Han P, Lu X, Lian YN, Huang XM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510120, P. R. China.

The diagnosis of postradiation nasopharyngeal skull base lesions in petients with
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is still a tough problem in clinical practice. An 
early and accurate diagnosis is important for subsequent management. We
prospectively evaluated the diagnostic value of plasma Epstein-Barr virus(EBV)
DNA in detecting postradiation nasopharyngeal skull base lesions in NPC patients.
From July 2006 to September 2010, 90 patients with postradiation NPC (34 women
and 56 men; median age: 42 years) met the selection criteria and were recruited
in this study. All postradiation nasopharyngeal skull base lesions were found in 
the latest magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examinations before endoscopic
surgery, and the nasopharyngeal cavity was normal under flexible
nasopharyngoscopy. Plasma EBV DNA detection was performed within 2 weeks before
endoscopic surgery. A total of 90 endoscopic operations were successfully
performed without any postoperative complications. Recurrences confirmed by
postoperative pathology were found in 30 patients. The specificity, positive and 
negative predictive values of plasma EBV DNA detection were better than those of 
MRI. In addition, combining plasma EBV DNA detection with MRI improved the
specificity and positive predictive values of MRI. Plasma EBV DNA detection
followed by MRI would help to diagnose recurrence whereas MRI was unable. These
results indicate that plasma EBV DNA is an effective and feasible biomarker for
detecting postradiation nasopharyngeal skull base lesions in NPC patients.

DOI: 10.5732/cjc.011.10279 
PMCID: PMC3777480
PMID: 22237037  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
