

2097. Diagn Cytopathol. 2010 Nov;38(11):795-800. doi: 10.1002/dc.21293.

Assessing for primary oropharyngeal or nasopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma
from fine needle aspiration of cervical lymph node metastases.

Jannapureddy S(1), Cohen C, Lau S, Beitler JJ, Siddiqui MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University Hospital,
Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

In fine needle aspirates of cervical lymph nodes with metastatic squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC), the site of origin may not be clinically evident. The
distinction between oropharyngeal and nasopharyngeal primary SCC has important
management consequences. In the current study, we evaluated metastatic SCC for
HPV types 16, 18, 31, 33, 51 (by in situ hybridization[ISH]), p16 and ProExC
(surrogate HPV markers), and Epstein Barr Virus reported in nasopharyngeal SCC.
Forty patients diagnosed between 2004 and 2008, with adequate cell block material
were identified. ISH for high risk HPV and EBV (EBER), and immunohistochemistry
for p16 and ProExC were performed. Primary site was designated in 31 cases with
26 head and neck including 11 oropharyngeal and 2 nasopharyngeal, and 5 other
sites. High risk HPV was detected in 9 cases (22.5%), p16 in 16 (40%), ProExC in 
35 (87.5%), and EBER in 2 (5%). All cases with high risk HPV ISH also showed
overexpression of p16. The sensitivity for HPV infection by both surrogate
markers was 100%; specificity for p16 and ProExC was 78.7 and 16.1%,
respectively. Seven (63.6%) oropharyngeal SCC were positive for HPV ISH and
negative for EBV; one nasopharyngeal SCC (50%) was EBER positive and HPV
negative. HPV and EBER detection can serve as indicators for oropharyngeal and
nasopharyngeal primary SCC, respectively, however our data show that only a
subset (63.6%) of oropharyngeal SCC are high risk HPV-related. Additionally,
despite their high sensitivity for HPV infection, surrogate markers, especially
ProExC, lack specificity.

Â© 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/dc.21293 
PMID: 20014308  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
