

210. Hum Gene Ther. 2012 Mar;23(3):295-301. doi: 10.1089/hum.2011.128. Epub 2012 Jan
11.

Oncolytic measles virus encoding thyroidal sodium iodide symporter for squamous
cell cancer of the head and neck radiovirotherapy.

Li H(1), Peng KW, Russell SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Clinic Department of Molecular Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Oncolytic measles virus (MV) encoding the human thyroidal sodium iodide symporter
(MV-NIS) has proved to be safe after intraperitoneal or intravenous
administration in patients with ovarian cancer or multiple myeloma, respectively,
but it has not yet been administered through intratumoral injection in humans.
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the head and neck (SCCHN) usually is locally
invasive and spreads to the cervical lymph nodes, which are suitable for the
intratumoral administration of oncolytic viruses. To test whether oncolytic MV is
an effective treatment for SCCHN, we used oncolytic MV-NIS to infect SCCHN in
vitro and in vivo. The data show that SCCHN cells were infected and killed by
MV-NIS in vitro. Permissiveness of the tumor cells to MV infection was not
affected by irradiation after viral addition. Monitored noninvasively through
radioiodine-based single-photon emission computed tomography/computed tomography,
intratumorally virus-delivered NIS has concentrated the radioiodine in the
MV-NIS-treated tumors in the FaDu mouse xenograft model of human SCCHN, and the
antitumor effect could be boosted significantly (p<0.05) either with concomitant 
cyclophosphamide therapy or with appropriately timed administration of
radioiodine (131)I. MV-NIS could be a promising new anticancer agent that may
substantially enhance the outcomes of standard therapy after intratumoral
administration in patients with locally advanced SCCHN.

DOI: 10.1089/hum.2011.128 
PMCID: PMC3300082
PMID: 22235810  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
