

2101. Semin Cancer Biol. 2018 Oct;52(Pt 2):228-240. doi:
10.1016/j.semcancer.2018.01.008. Epub 2018 Jan 31.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma: Genomics and emerging biomarkers for
immunomodulatory cancer treatments.

Solomon B(1), Young RJ(2), Rischin D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, 305 Grattan St,
Melbourne, Victoria 3000, Australia; Research Division, Peter MacCallum Cancer
Centre, 305 Grattan St, Melbourne, Victoria 3000, Australia; Sir Peter MacCallum 
Department of Oncology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3052,
Australia. Electronic address: ben.solomon@petermac.org.
(2)Research Division, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, 305 Grattan St, Melbourne,
Victoria 3000, Australia.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, 305 Grattan St,
Melbourne, Victoria 3000, Australia; Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, 
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) comprises a heterogeneous group of 
tumors that arise from the squamous epithelium of the oral cavity, oropharynx,
larynx and hypopharynx. While many HNSCCs are related to classical etiologic
factors of smoking and alcohol, a clinically, genomically, and immunologically
distinct subgroup of tumors arise from the epithelium of the tonsil and the base 
of tongue as a result of infection with Human Papilloma Virus (HPV). In this
review we describe the genomic and immunologic landscape of HNSCC, highlighting
differences between HPV-positive and HPV-negative HNSCC. While HPV-negative
tumors are characterized by tobacco-associated mutations in genes including TP53 
and CDKN2A, in HPV-positive HNSCC integration of viral genome from HPV into the
host cellular genome results in expression of the E6 and E7 viral oncoproteins,
with consequent degradation of p53 and functional inactivation of Rb. The immune 
microenvironment of HNSCC is characterized by changes in immune cell populations,
immune checkpoints, as well as tumor or microenvironmental factors that alter the
balance of the immune milieu in favor of immunosuppression, allowing tumor
evasion and escape from immune surveillance. Immune therapies, in particular
those targeting the PD1 receptor or its ligand PD-L1, including nivolumab,
pembrolizumab, durvalumab, and atezolizumab have shown significant efficacy in
subsets of patients with HNSCC. Current trials are evaluating the efficacy of
these agents in combination with chemotherapy, radiotherapy and other immune
therapies including CTLA-4 and IDO-1 inhibitors. While biomarkers including PD-L1
expression, PD-L2 expression and the interferon-gamma gene signature show
potential to predict benefit from checkpoint inhibitor therapy - it is hoped that
improved understanding of the genomic and immune landscape will lead to ways to
improved strategies to stratify patients and to select which HNSCC are most
likely to benefit from these therapies.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2018.01.008 
PMID: 29355614  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
