

2103. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2013 Mar;9(3):534-43. Epub 2013 Jan 7.

Immunotherapy in new pre-clinical models of HPV-associated oral cancers.

Paolini F(1), Massa S, Manni I, Franconi R, Venuti A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology; Regina Elena National Cancer Institute; Rome, Italy.

Cervical, anal, penile and a sub-set of head and neck (HN) tumors are critical
health problems caused by high risk Human Papilloma Viruses (HPVs), like HPV type
16. No specific/effective pharmacological treatments exist. A valid preventive
vaccination as well as the immunotherapy of persistent infections, pre-cancerous 
lesions or early-stage cancers could drive the HPV disease burden down. These
treatments might be featured through low-cost platforms like those based on DNA
and plant biotechnologies to produce tailored and enhanced formulations taking
profit from the use of plants as bio-factories and as a source of
immune-stimulators. Finally, and regardless of the formulation type, pre-clinical
tests and models are crucial to foresee efficacy of immunotherapy before clinical
trials. Â  In this study, we created an orthotopic mouse model for HPV-related
oral tumors, a subset of HN tumors for which no models have been generated
before. The model was obtained by inducing the stable expression of the HPV16 E7 
protein into the mouse oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) AT-84 (AT-84 E7). The 
AT-84 E7 cells were injected into the mouth pavement of C3H mice via an
extra-oral route to obtain orthotopic tumors. The model turned out to mimic the
natural history of the human HPV oral cancer. From AT-84 E7, through engineering 
to express luciferase, the bioluminescent AT-84 E7-Luc cells were obtained for a 
fast and easy monitoring by imaging. The AT-84 E7 and the AT-84 E7-Luc tumors
were used to test the efficacy of E7-based therapeutic vaccines that we had
previously generated and that had been already proven to be active in mice
against non-orthotopic E7-expressing tumors (TC-1 cells). In particular, we used 
genetic and plant-derived formulations based on attenuated HPV16 E7 variants
either fused to plant virus genes with immunological activity or produced by
tobacco plants. Mice were monitored by imaging allowing to test the size
reduction of the mouth implanted experimental tumors in function of the different
regimens used. The proposed tumor model is easy to handle and to reproduce and it
is efficacious in monitoring immunotherapy. Furthermore, it is expected to be
more predictive of clinical outcome of therapeutic vaccines than non-orthotopic
models that are currently used. Finally, imaging offers unique opportunities to
predict formulation efficacy through measuring tumor growth in vivo.


PMCID: PMC3891709
PMID: 23296123  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
