

2106. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 Nov;39(11):1591-5. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000521.

Ciliated HPV-related Carcinoma: A Well-differentiated Form of Head and Neck
Carcinoma That Can Be Mistaken for a Benign Cyst.

Bishop JA(1), Westra WH.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology †Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery ‡Oncology, The
Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD.

Although human papillomavirus (HPV)-related oropharyngeal carcinomas (HPV-OPCs)
are generally regarded as "poorly differentiated," they actually maintain a close
resemblance to the lymphoepithelium of the tonsillar crypts from which they
arise: they are basaloid, exhibit minimal keratinization, and are often permeated
by lymphocytes. In rare cases, the presence of cilia in a primary HPV-OPC and
their persistence in lymph node metastasis can confound the distinction between a
benign and malignant process. Three cases of ciliated HPV-OPCs were identified
from the archives of The Johns Hopkins Head and Neck Pathology consultation
service. HPV status was determined using p16 immunohistochemistry and high-risk
HPV in situ hybridization. All 3 patients presented with a cystic lymph node
metastasis without a known primary carcinoma. One metastasis was originally
diagnosed as a branchial cleft cyst only to regionally recur 7 years later. In 2 
cases, a primary HPV-OPC was found in the tonsil. The carcinomas exhibited both
nonkeratinizing squamous epithelium and cystic/microcystic spaces lined by
ciliated columnar cells. Both the squamous and ciliated cells were HPV positive. 
This report draws attention to a novel variant of HPV-related head and neck
cancer that exhibits ciliated columnar cells. This variant challenges prevailing 
notions that: (1) HPV-OPCs are uniformly poorly differentiated cancers; (2) cilia
are an infallible feature of benignancy; and (3) presence of cilia is a reliable 
criterion for establishing branchial cleft origin when dealing with cystic
lesions of the lateral neck.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000521 
PMCID: PMC4602404
PMID: 26457358  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
