

2111. Am J Surg Pathol. 2016 Apr;40(4):519-28. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000581.

Evaluation for High-risk HPV in Squamous Cell Carcinomas and Precursor Lesions
Arising in the Conjunctiva and Lacrimal Sac.

Afrogheh AH(1), Jakobiec FA, Hammon R, Grossniklaus HE, Rocco J, Lindeman NI,
Sadow PM, Faquin WC.

Author information: 
(1)*Pathology Service, Massachusetts General Hospital ‡Department of
Ophthalmology, David G. Cogan Laboratory of Ophthalmic Pathology, Massachusetts
Eye and Ear Infirmary §Department of Otolaryngology, Massachusetts Eye and Ear
Infirmary #Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital †Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA ∥Department of Ophthalmology, L.F. Montgomery Laboratory of
Ophthalmic Pathology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA ¶Division of Head and Neck
Oncologic Surgery, The Ohio State Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH.

High-risk human papilloma virus (HR-HPV) is a well-established causative agent of
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). In addition, HR-HPV has occasionally
been reported to be present in dysplastic and malignant lesions of the
conjunctiva and lacrimal sac, although its overall incidence and etiological role
in periocular SCC are controversial. Sequential surgical samples of 52 combined
cases of invasive SCC (I-SCC) and SCC in situ (SCCIS) from 2 periocular sites
(conjunctiva and lacrimal sac) diagnosed over a 14-year period (2000 to 2014)
were selected for evaluation, and relevant patient characteristics were
documented. p16 immunohistochemistry was performed as a screening test. All
p16-positive cases were further evaluated for HR-HPV using DNA in situ
hybridization (DNA ISH), and a subset was also analyzed by polymerase chain
reaction (PCR). Of 43 ocular surface squamous neoplasias (OSSNs), 30% (n=13; 8
SCCIS and 5 I-SCC cases) were positive for HR-HPV. HPV-positive OSSNs occurred in
8 men and 5 women with a mean age of 60 years (range, 39 to 94 y). HPV type-16
was detected in all conjunctival cases evaluated by PCR. All 5 conjunctival
I-SCCs were nonkeratinizing (n=4) or partially keratinizing (n=1) and managed by 
simple excision. In contrast, HPV-negative conjunctival I-SCCs were predominantly
keratinizing (11 keratinizing and 2 nonkeratinizing). Of 9 lacrimal sac I-SCCs
(LSSCCs), 66.7% (n=6) were positive for HR-HPV by p16 and DNA ISH; HPV subtypes
were HPV-16 (n=5) and HPV-58 (n=1). In addition, 2 p16-positive cases with
negative DNA ISH results were HR-HPV positive (HPV-16 and HPV-33) when evaluated 
by PCR, suggesting that the rate of HR-HPV positivity among the LSSCCs may be as 
high as 89% (n=8). The combined group of HR-HPV-positive LSSCCs was seen in 4 men
and 4 women with a mean age of 60 years (range, 34 to 71 y). Seven of the 8
HPV-positive LSSCCs (87.5%) had a nonkeratinizing or partially keratinizing
histomorphology, whereas 1 case (12.5%) was predominantly keratinizing. The
presence of HR-HPV in 30% of OSSNs and at least 66.7% of LSSCCs suggests the
possibility of an etiologic role for HR-HPV at these sites.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000581 
PMID: 26735858  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
