

2112. Infect Dis (Lond). 2015 Feb;47(2):88-95. doi: 10.3109/00365548.2014.968610. Epub 
2014 Nov 26.

Bone mineral density changes after 2 years of ARV treatment, compared to naive
HIV-1-infected patients not on HAART.

Rey D(1), Treger M, Sibilia J, Priester M, Bernard-Henry C, Cheneau C, Javier RM.

Author information: 
(1)From the Le Trait d'Union, Hôpitaux Universitaires Strasbourg.

BACKGROUND: The prevalence of osteopenia and osteoporosis is increased in human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected patients. The pathogenesis of this low bone
mineral density (BMD) is multifactorial.
METHODS: We conducted a prospective study over a 2-year period of the BMD in
non-treated ARV-naïve HIV-infected-males, in comparison to HIV-infected males
commencing a first ARV treatment, and analyzed the evolution of bone turnover
markers.
RESULTS: A total of 39 caucasian males (median age 38.6 years) were enrolled,
including 10 who started ARV treatment (group 1), and 29 without indications for 
ARV therapy (group 2). In the latter group, 11 subjects commenced ARV during the 
study; therefore the remainder of their follow-up was within group 1, which
finally consisted of 21 patients. At baseline, 9 patients (19.5%) had
osteoporosis at least at 1 site, while 28 (61%) showed osteopenia. Lower BMD was 
correlated with tobacco use. Lumbar spine and total hip BMD significantly
decreased in group 1 patients after 6 months of treatment, then stabilized (2.4% 
and 4% loss, respectively, at 24 months), while no significant change in BMD was 
observed in group 2 subjects. At baseline, one patient had an increased CTX
(C-terminal cross-linking telopeptide of type 1 collagen) and all BSAP
(bone-specific alkaline phosphatase) results were normal. During follow-up, both 
CTX and BSAP increased in group 1 patients, while they did not change in group 2.
CONCLUSION: Osteoporosis and osteopenia are frequent in HIV-infected males. After
ARV initiation, BMD decreased, and bone turnover markers increased, even though
the BMD remained stable in non-treated patients. These results underline the
impact of HIV treatment on BMD and bone metabolism.

DOI: 10.3109/00365548.2014.968610 
PMID: 25426996  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
