

2114. Pathol Res Pract. 2015 Sep;211(9):697-701. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2015.06.006. Epub
2015 Jun 11.

BK polyomavirus-infected nephrogenic adenoma of the urinary bladder in a renal
transplant recipient: A case report.

Alexiev BA(1), Papadimitriou JC(2), Drachenberg CB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, NBW85, 22 
S Greene Street, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. Electronic address: balexiev@umm.edu.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, NBW85, 22 
S Greene Street, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

This report describes the morphological and immunohistochemical features of the
first case of a nephrogenic adenoma (NA) of the urinary bladder infected with
polyomavirus. The findings occurred in a female patient, 6 months post cadaveric 
renal transplant. Voided urine cytology was positive for decoy cells. Renal
transplant biopsy showed no evidence of BKV allograft nephropathy. Cystoscopy
demonstrated multiple erythematous patchy and nodular areas. These were found in 
the left and right posterior wall, and the right lateral wall toward the bladder 
neck, and were suspicious for either chronic inflammation or neoplasia.
Hematoxylin-eosin stained sections showed a NA with scattered pleomorphic nuclei 
demonstrating smudged chromatin and amorphous basophilic ground glass inclusions.
Strong expression of polyomavirus large T antigen (SV40) and VP1 was seen in
atypical lesional cells, consistent with cytopathic lytic polyomavirus infection.
Positive staining with PAX8 supports the renal cell derivation of NA. The
findings in the present case suggest that polyomavirus infection, as an irritant 
of the bladder mucosa, contributed to the cytologic atypia of infected lesional
cells but is not a pathogenic factor of NA.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prp.2015.06.006 
PMID: 26189101  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
