

2117. JAMA Oncol. 2017 Nov 1;3(11):1487-1494. doi: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2017.0973.

Patterns of Treatment Failure and Postrecurrence Outcomes Among Patients With
Locally Advanced Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma After Chemoradiotherapy
Using Modern Radiation Techniques.

Leeman JE(1), Li JG(2), Pei X(1), Venigalla P(1), Zumsteg ZS(3), Katsoulakis
E(1), Lupovitch E(1), McBride SM(1), Tsai CJ(1), Boyle JO(4), Roman BR(4), Morris
LGT(4), Dunn LA(5), Sherman EJ(5), Lee NY(1), Riaz N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, New York.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Jiangxi Cancer Hospital, Nanchang, China.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles,
California.
(4)Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York.
(5)Department of Medical Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, New York.

Importance: Even though 15% to 50% of patients with head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) experience recurrence, relatively little is known regarding
patterns of treatment failure and postrecurrence outcomes after chemoradiotherapy
using modern radiation techniques (intensity-modulated radiotherapy [IMRT]).
Recurrence patterns are significantly affected by variations in the quality of
radiotherapy, which may confound findings from multicenter trials.
Objective: To assess patterns of treatment failure and postrecurrence outcomes
for patients with HNSCC treated with contemporary radiotherapy techniques.
Design, Setting, and Participants: This large single-institution cohort study
reviewed the outcomes of 1000 consecutive patients with stage III to IVB
oropharyngeal carcinoma (n = 703), laryngeal carcinoma (n = 126), or
hypopharyngeal carcinoma (n = 46) treated with definitive IMRT with or without
concurrent chemotherapy, as well as patients with oral cavity carcinoma (n = 125)
treated with postoperative IMRT with or without concurrent systemic therapy, from
December 1, 2001, to December 31, 2013, with a median follow-up of 65.1 months
among surviving patients. Data analysis was performed from January 31, 2016, to
February 17, 2017.
Main Outcomes and Measures: Patterns of treatment failure and overall survival
following locoregional failure or distant metastasis.
Results: Among the 1000 patients (186 women and 814 men; mean [SD] age, 59.3
[10.8] years), there were no marginal or isolated out-of-radiation-field
failures. Among subsites, the cumulative incidence of local failure was highest
among patients with oral cavity carcinoma vs those with oropharyngeal carcinoma
(hazard ratio, 5.2; 95% CI, 3.1-8.6; P < .001). Furthermore, patients with oral
cavity carcinoma experienced significantly shorter survival following distant
metastasis (hazard ratio, 3.66; 95% CI, 1.98-6.80; P < .001). Patients with
oropharyngeal carcinoma positive for human papillomavirus or p16 lived longer
after locoregional failure compared with patents with oropharyngeal carcinoma
negative for human papillomavirus or p16 (median survival, 36.5 vs 13.6 months;
P = .007) but not after distant metastasis. Salvage surgery was associated with
improved overall survival following locoregional failure (hazard ratio, 0.51; 95%
CI, 0.34-0.77; P = .001); oligometastatic disease (1 vs ≥2 lesions: hazard ratio,
0.32; 95% CI, 0.16-0.63; P = .001) was associated with improved overall survival 
following distant metastasis.
Conclusions and Relevance: Overall survival after recurrence of HNSCC is
influenced by the HNSCC subsite and human papillomavirus or p16 status, as well
surgical and systemic interventions. An oligometastatic phenotype characterizes
patients with solitary metastasis after chemoradiotherapy. These findings have
important implications for clinical trial designs for HNSCC in the recurrent and 
oligometastatic setting.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2017.0973 
PMCID: PMC5710194
PMID: 28542679  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
