
Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsNone declared.


212. Oncotarget. 2016 Jun 21;7(25):38598-38611. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.9560.

Selective antitumor activity of roscovitine in head and neck cancer.

Gary C(1), Hajek M(1), Biktasova A(1)(2), Bellinger G(1), Yarbrough WG(1)(3)(4), 
Issaeva N(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery Division of Otolaryngology, Yale University, New Haven, 
CT USA.
(2)Current address: Children's Cancer Institute, Lowy Cancer Research Centre,
UNSW, Australia.
(3)Department of Pathology, Yale University, New Haven, CT USA.
(4)Department of Yale Cancer Center, Yale University, New Haven, CT USA.

Radiation and chemotherapy that are commonly used to treat human cancers damage
cellular DNA. DNA damage appears to be more toxic to cancer cells than normal
cells, most likely due to deregulated checkpoint activation and/or deficiency in 
DNA repair pathways that are characteristics of many tumors. However, unwanted
side effects arise as a result of DNA damage to normal cells during the
treatment.Here, we show that roscovitine, a cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)
inhibitor that inhibits CDK-1, CDK-2, CDK-5, CDK-7, and CDK-9 due to competitive 
binding to the ATP site on the kinases, causes significant DNA damage followed by
p53-dependent cell death in human papilloma virus (HPV)-positive, but not in
HPV-negative, head and neck cancer cells. Since HPV positivity was a molecular
marker for increased sensitivity of cells to roscovitine, we reasoned that
systemic roscovitine administration would not be toxic to healthy HPV-negative
tissue. Indeed, low roscovitine doses significantly inhibited the growth of
HPV-associated xenografted tumors in mice without causing any detectable side
effects.Given that inhibition of CDKs has been shown to inhibit replication of
several viruses, we suggest that roscovitine treatment may represent a selective 
and safe targeted therapeutic option against HPV-positive head and neck cancer.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.9560 
PMCID: PMC5122414
PMID: 27233076  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
