

2125. Mol Ther. 2010 Sep;18(9):1599-605. doi: 10.1038/mt.2010.120. Epub 2010 Jun 29.

Therapeutic effect of sodium iodide symporter gene therapy combined with external
beam radiotherapy and targeted drugs that inhibit DNA repair.

Hingorani M(1), White CL, Zaidi S, Pandha HS, Melcher AA, Bhide SA, Nutting CM,
Syrigos KN, Vile RG, Vassaux G, Harrington KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Targeted Therapy Team, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK.

Adenoviral (AdV) transfer of sodium iodide symporter (NIS) gene has translational
potential, but relatively low levels of transduction and subsequent radioisotope 
uptake limit the efficacy of the approach. In previous studies, we showed that
combining NIS gene delivery with external beam radiotherapy (EBRT) and DNA damage
repair inhibitors increased viral gene expression and radioiodide uptake. Here,
we report the therapeutic efficacy of this strategy. An adenovirus expressing NIS
from a telomerase promoter (Ad-hTR-NIS) was cytotoxic combined with relatively
high-dose (50 microCi) (131)I therapy and enhanced the efficacy of EBRT combined 
with low-dose (10 and 25 microCi) (131)I therapy in colorectal and head and neck 
cancer cells. Combining this approach with ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) or
DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) inhibition caused maintenance of
double-stranded DNA breaks (DSBs) at 24 hours and increased cytotoxicity on
clonogenic assay. When the triplet of NIS-mediated (131)I therapy, EBRT, and
DNA-PKi was used in vivo, 90% of mice were tumor-free at 5 weeks. Acute radiation
toxicity in the EBRT field was not exacerbated. In contrast, DNA-PKi did not
enhance the therapeutic efficacy of EBRT plus adenovirus-mediated
HSVtk/ganciclovir (GCV). Therefore, combining NIS gene therapy and EBRT
represents an ideal strategy to exploit the therapeutic benefits of novel
radiosensitizers.

DOI: 10.1038/mt.2010.120 
PMCID: PMC2956921
PMID: 20588260  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
