

2127. Head Neck Oncol. 2012 Jun 13;4:33. doi: 10.1186/1758-3284-4-33.

A patient with primary Burkitt's lymphoma of the postnasal space: case report.

Upile T(1), Jerjes W, Abiola J, Kafas P, Sandison A, Hamdoon Z, Al-Khawalde M,
Radhi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Chase Farm & Barnet NHS Trust, Enfield,
UK. mrtupile@yahoo.com

Expression of concern in
    BMC Med. 2014 Feb 05;12 :24.

INTRODUCTION: Burkitt's lymphoma is a highly aggressive lymphoma. The endemic
form is present with Epstein - Barr virus. The most common sites are the
mandible, facial bones, kidneys, gastrointestinal tract, ovaries, breast and
extra-nodal sites. We present the first reported case of a primary Burkitt's
lymphoma of the postnasal space occurring in an elderly Caucasian male.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 72-year-old Caucasian male farmer presented with a 6-week
history of a productive cough and a painless left sided cervical swelling.
Examination of the neck revealed a 5 cm by 5 cm hard mass in the left anterior
triangle. A CT scan of the head and neck showed a soft tissue swelling in the
postnasal space. Histology of the postnasal space mass showed squamous mucosa
infiltrated by a high grade lymphoma. Immunohistochemical staining and in situ
hybridisation confirmed the tumour to be Epstein - Barr virus Ribonucleic acid
negative suggesting this was a rare sporadic form of the tumour presenting in a
location that is atypical for the clinical subtype and age of the patient.
CONCLUSION: This is the first reported case of sporadic Burkitt's lymphoma of the
postnasal space of an elderly Caucasian male in the absence of Epstein - Barr
virus or human immunodeficiency virus infection and further serves to illustrate 
the diversity of histological subtypes of malignancies that may develop at this
concealed site.

DOI: 10.1186/1758-3284-4-33 
PMCID: PMC3414781
PMID: 22695293  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
