

214. Int J Cancer. 2012 Apr 15;130(8):1806-12. doi: 10.1002/ijc.26195. Epub 2011 Aug
2.

Human papillomavirus status in young patients with head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma.

van Monsjou HS(1), van Velthuysen ML, van den Brekel MW, Jordanova ES, Melief CJ,
Balm AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Oncology and Surgery, NKI/Antoni van Leeuwenhoek
Hospital, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. h.v.monsjou@nki.nl

The role of human papillomavirus (HPV) in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) development has been recognized only in the last decade. Although younger
patients develop HNSCC associated with HPV, the incidence in young patients has
not been studied. Forty-five young HNSCC patients (<40 years) were tested for HPV
and the expression of p16(ink4a) and p53 in tumor biopsies. The presence of HPV
was correlated with the absence and presence of alcohol and tobacco exposure.
Paraffin-embedded, archival biopsy materials from HNSCC of 45 patients younger
than 40 years were analyzed. HPV subtypes were identified by PCR followed by
genotyping. Expression of p16(ink4a) and p53 were determined by
immunohistochemistry. Fourteen (31%) of the HNSCC specimens from 45 patients
unequivocally exhibited HPV16 positivity. Sixty percentage of the oropharyngeal
tumors and 5% of the oral cavity tumors were HPV16 positive. P16(ink4a)
overexpression was detected in 93% of the HPV16-positive tumors. None of the
HPV16 tumors showed p53 overexpression. There was no association of HPV
positivity with (lack of) exposure to alcohol and smoking. HPV association was
not exclusively detected in nonsmoking, nondrinking young HNSCC patients. The
presence of p16(ink4a) accumulation and the absence of p53 overexpression are
good surrogate markers for HPV-associated HNSCC.

Copyright Â© 2011 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.26195 
PMID: 21607949  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
