

2141. Saudi J Kidney Dis Transpl. 2015 Nov;26(6):1289-93. doi:
10.4103/1319-2442.168676.

Membranous nephropathy and severe acute kidney injury following influenza
vaccination.

Patel C, Shah HH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Kidney Diseases and Hypertension, Department of Medicine, North
Shore University Hospital and Long Island Jewish Medical Center, Hofstra North
Shore-LIJ School of Medicine, Great Neck, NY, USA.

Immunization with influenza vaccine remains an important global health strategy
to prevent outbreaks and epidemics of seasonal influenza. Influenza vaccine has
rarely been associated with vasculitis, acute kidney injury (AKI) and nephrotic
syndrome (NS). Glomerular diseases following influenza vaccination have also been
rarely reported. We report a patient who developed acute-onset massive
proteinuria with NS and severe AKI soon after receiving the 2009 H1N1 influenza
vaccine. Kidney biopsy showed membranous nephropathy (MN) and acute interstitial 
nephritis (AIN). Optimal management of glomerular diseases or AIN following
influenza vaccination is not known. Our patient responded well to an initial
course of oral corticosteroid therapy with normalization of serum creatinine
level but had a relapse of NS with AKI soon after completion of corticosteroid
therapy. A repeat kidney biopsy revealed MN and resolved AIN. A subsequent
prolonged course of oral corticosteroids resulted in complete clinical remission 
of the NS as well as normalization of renal function. Long-term response to
corticosteroid therapy in such cases is not known. However, our patient continued
to remain in clinical remission with normal renal function, five years after the 
initial treatment.

DOI: 10.4103/1319-2442.168676 
PMID: 26586075  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
