

2143. Mol Med Rep. 2016 Sep;14(3):2431-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2016.5552. Epub 2016 Jul 27.

Co-expression of ING4 and P53 enhances hypopharyngeal cancer chemosensitivity to 
cisplatin in vivo.

Ren X(1), Liu H(2), Zhang M(1), Wang M(1), Ma S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Bengbu Medical 
College, Bengbu, Anhui 233030, P.R. China.
(2)Faculty of Pharmacy, Bengbu Medical College, Bengbu, Anhui 233030, P.R. China.

Hypopharyngeal cancer is a distinct type of malignant head and neck tumor, which 
exhibits low sensitivity to anti-cancer drugs. The importance of developing
methods for reducing chemotherapy resistance, and improving and enhancing
prognosis has previously been emphasized and is considered a challenge for
effective clinical treatment of hypopharyngeal cancer. The current study
investigated the effects of co‑expression of inhibitor of growth protein 4 (ING4)
and P53, a tumor suppressor gene, on chemosensitivity to cisplatin in human
hypopharyngeal cancer xenografts in vivo, and the potential molecular mechanisms 
involved. A tumor model was established by injecting athymic nude mice with FADU 
human hypopharyngeal cancer cells. Five days after intratumoral and peritumoral
injections of an empty adenoviral vector (Ad), Ad‑ING4‑P53, cisplatin, or a
combination of Ad‑ING4‑P53 and cisplatin (Ad‑ING4‑P53 + cisplatin) every other
day for 5 days, the mice were euthanized and their tumors, livers, and kidneys
were removed. The tumor weights were used to calculate the inhibition rate, and
the expression levels of ING4 and P53 were detected by reverse
transcription‑polymerase chain reaction. Additionally, apoptotic cells were
detected using terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling, and 
immunohistochemistry determined the levels ING4, P53, B‑cell lymphoma‑2 (Bcl‑2)
and Bcl‑2 associated X protein (Bax) protein expression. The results demonstrated
increased expression of ING4 and P53 in the Ad‑ING4‑P53 groups compared with PBS 
and Ad groups, indicating successful introduction of the genes into the tumor
cells. Notably, the Ad‑ING4‑P53 + cisplatin group exhibited a higher inhibition
rate compared with the four other groups. The results of immunohistochemistry
analysis demonstrated that Bax expression was increased and Bcl‑2 was decreased
in the Ad‑ING4‑P53 + cisplatin group. This suggested that the enhanced cisplatin 
chemosensitivity with Ad-ING4-P53 gene therapy in hypopharyngeal cancer
xenografts may be associated with apoptosis induction through upregulation of Bax
expression and downregulation of Bcl‑2. The results of the present study
indicated that gene therapy combined with cisplatin treatment may be a promising 
treatment for human hypopharyngeal cancer.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2016.5552 
PMCID: PMC4991689
PMID: 27484725  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
