

2153. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2015 Mar;64(3):367-79. doi: 10.1007/s00262-014-1640-x.
Epub 2014 Dec 24.

A phase I dose escalation trial of MAGE-A3- and HPV16-specific peptide
immunomodulatory vaccines in patients with recurrent/metastatic (RM) squamous
cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN).

Zandberg DP(1), Rollins S, Goloubeva O, Morales RE, Tan M, Taylor R, Wolf JS,
Schumaker LM, Cullen KJ, Zimrin A, Ord R, Lubek JE, Suntharalingam M,
Papadimitriou JC, Mann D, Strome SE, Edelman MJ.

Author information: 
(1)University of Maryland Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum Cancer Center, 22 South 
Greene St. Rm N9E29, Baltimore, MD, 21201, USA, dzandberg@umm.edu.

BACKGROUND: We conducted a phase I dose escalation study to evaluate the safety
and immunologic response to peptide immunomodulatory vaccines GL-0810 (HPV16) and
GL-0817 (MAGE-A3) in HPV16 and MAGE-A3-positive RM-SCCHN patients, respectively.
METHODS: Three dose levels (500, 1,000, and 1,500 µg) of GL-0810 or GL-0817 with 
adjuvants Montanide (1.2 ml) and GM-CSF (100 µg/m2) were administered
subcutaneously q2 weeks for a total of four vaccinations in HPV16 and
MAGE-A3-positive RM-SCCHN patients, respectively.
RESULTS: Nine and seven patients were enrolled in the HPV16 and MAGE-A3 cohorts, 
respectively. No dose-limiting toxicities were observed, and toxicity was
predominantly local and grade 1 (erythema, pain, and itching at the injection
site). In those patients who received all four vaccinations, 80 % (4/5) of the
HPV16 cohort and 67 % (4/6) of the MAGE-A3 cohort developed antigen-specific T
cell and antibody responses to the vaccine. Significant concordance between T
cell and antibody responses was observed for both groups. No clear dose-response 
correlation was seen. All patients progressed by RECIST at first repeat imaging, 
except for one patient in the MAGE-A3 500 µg cohort who had stable disease for
10.5 months. The median PFS and OS for the MAGE-A3 cohorts were 79 and 183 days, 
respectively, and for the HPV16 cohort 80 and 196 days, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: GL-0810 and GL-0817 were well tolerated in patients with RM-SCCHN
with T cell and antibody responses observed in the majority of patients who
received all four vaccinations.

DOI: 10.1007/s00262-014-1640-x 
PMCID: PMC4381442
PMID: 25537079  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
