

2157. Mol Oncol. 2013 Aug;7(4):776-90. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2013.03.004. Epub 2013 Apr
4.

A patient tumor transplant model of squamous cell cancer identifies PI3K
inhibitors as candidate therapeutics in defined molecular bins.

Keysar SB(1), Astling DP, Anderson RT, Vogler BW, Bowles DW, Morton JJ, Paylor
JJ, Glogowska MJ, Le PN, Eagles-Soukup JR, Kako SL, Takimoto SM, Sehrt DB,
Umpierrez A, Pittman MA, Macfadden SM, Helber RM, Peterson S, Hausman DF, Said S,
Leem TH, Goddard JA, Arcaroli JJ, Messersmith WA, Robinson WA, Hirsch FR,
Varella-Garcia M, Raben D, Wang XJ, Song JI, Tan AC, Jimeno A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Colorado
School of Medicine (UCSOM), Aurora, CO 80045, United States.

Targeted therapy development in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is 
challenging given the rarity of activating mutations. Additionally, HNSCC
incidence is increasing related to human papillomavirus (HPV). We sought to
develop an in vivo model derived from patients reflecting the evolving HNSCC
epidemiologic landscape, and use it to identify new therapies. Primary and
relapsed tumors from HNSCC patients, both HPV+ and HPV-, were implanted on mice, 
giving rise to 25 strains. Resulting xenografts were characterized by detecting
key mutations, measuring protein expression by IHC and gene expression/pathway
analysis by mRNA-sequencing. Drug efficacy studies were run with representative
xenografts using the approved drug cetuximab as well as the new PI3K inhibitor
PX-866. Tumors maintained their original morphology, genetic profiles and drug
susceptibilities through serial passaging. The genetic makeup of these tumors was
consistent with known frequencies of TP53, PI3KCA, NOTCH1 and NOTCH2 mutations.
Because the EGFR inhibitor cetuximab is a standard HNSCC therapy, we tested its
efficacy and observed a wide spectrum of efficacy. Cetuximab-resistant strains
had higher PI3K/Akt pathway gene expression and protein activation than
cetuximab-sensitive strains. The PI3K inhibitor PX-866 had anti-tumor efficacy in
HNSCC models with PIK3CA alterations. Finally, PI3K inhibition was effective in
two cases with NOTCH1 inactivating mutations. In summary, we have developed an
HNSCC model covering its clinical spectrum whose major genetic alterations and
susceptibility to anticancer agents represent contemporary HNSCC. This model
enables to prospectively test therapeutic-oriented hypotheses leading to
personalized medicine.

Copyright Â© 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molonc.2013.03.004 
PMCID: PMC3760013
PMID: 23607916  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
