

2168. J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2013 Dec 19;42:57. doi: 10.1186/1916-0216-42-57.

Prognostic utility of basaloid differentiation in oropharyngeal cancer.

Cooper T, Biron V, Adam B, Klimowicz AC, Puttagunta L, Seikaly H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, Department of Surgery,
University of Alberta, 1E4 University of Alberta Hospital, Edmonton, AB T6G 2B7, 
Canada. hadi.seikaly@albertahealthservices.ca.

BACKGROUND: Human papillomavirus (HPV) is recognized as the key risk factor for a
distinct subset of oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma. P16 is a reliable,
sensitive surrogate marker for HPV and confers a positive prognostic advantage.
Basaloid differentiation on hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining is anecdotally
noted by some pathologists to be associated with p16 positivity. This
association, however, has not been adequately quantified in the literature, nor
has the prognostic implications of basaloid differentiation been described.
OBJECTIVES: 1) To correlate the H&E staining feature of basaloid differentiation 
with p16 positivity in oropharyngeal cancer. 2) To investigate the prognostic
utility of basaloid differentiation in oropharyngeal cancer survival.
METHODS: Retrospective cross-sectional study of all patients diagnosed with and
treated for oropharyngeal cancer at a single tertiary cancer center from 2002 to 
2009. Tissue microarrays (TMAs) were generated from 208 oropharyngeal tumor
specimens stained with H&E and immunohistochemical markers. These oropharyngeal
TMAs were utilized in several previous publications. Samples were scored for
basaloid differentiation by a pathologist blinded to the p16 result. A
multivariate survival analysis with Cox-regression and Kaplan-Meier survival
analysis was performed.
RESULTS: In the 208 samples, basaloid differentiation correlated with p16
positivity (Spearman's rho 0.435). Basaloid differentiation and p16 positivity
were both independent predictors of improved survival. The 5 year disease
specific survival (DSS) was 73% for p16 positive tumors and 35% for p16 negative 
tumors (p < 0.001). Similarly, the 5 year DSS of basaloid differentiated tumors
was 74% compared to 41% for non-basaloid tumors (p = 0.001). Patients with p16
positive and basaloid differentiated tumors had the best survival outcomes with a
5 year DSS of 80%.
CONCLUSIONS: Basaloid differentiation is a feature on H&E which correlates with
p16 positivity and is a simple, inexpensive, independent, positive prognostic
indicator of comparable magnitude to p16 status. Due to the added prognostic
value of basaloid differentiation, this feature should be routinely reported by
qualified pathologists.

DOI: 10.1186/1916-0216-42-57 
PMCID: PMC3892036
PMID: 24350944  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
