

2171. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40767. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040767. Epub 2012 Jul 12.

Human papillomavirus-16 infection in advanced oral cavity cancer patients is
related to an increased risk of distant metastases and poor survival.

Lee LA(1), Huang CG, Liao CT, Lee LY, Hsueh C, Chen TC, Lin CY, Fan KH, Wang HM, 
Huang SF, Chen IH, Kang CJ, Ng SH, Yang SL, Tsao KC, Chang YL, Yen TC.

Author information: 
(1)Head and Neck Oncology Group, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Human papillomavirus (HPV) is an oncogenic virus causing
oropharyngeal cancers and resulting in a favorable outcome after the treatment.
The role of HPV in oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) remains ambiguous.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to examine the effect of HPV infection on disease
control among patients with OSCC following radical surgery with radiation-based
adjuvant therapy.
PATIENTS AND METHOD: We prospectively followed 173 patients with advanced OSCC
(96% were stage III/IV) who had undergone radical surgery and adjuvant therapy
between 2004 and 2006. They were followed between surgery and death or up to 60
months. Surgical specimens were examined using a PCR-based HPV blot test. The
primary endpoints were the risk of relapse and the time to relapse; the secondary
endpoints were disease-free survival, disease-specific survival, and overall
survival.
RESULTS: The prevalence of HPV-positive OSCC was 22%; HPV-16 (9%) and HPV-18 (7%)
were the genotypes most commonly encountered. Solitary HPV-16 infection was a
poor predictor of 5-year distant metastases (hazard ratio, 3.4; 95% confidence
interval, 1.4-8.0; P = 0.005), disease-free survival (P = 0.037),
disease-specific survival (P = 0.006), and overall survival (P = 0.010), whereas 
HPV-18 infection had no impact on 5-year outcomes. The rate of 5-year distant
metastases was significantly higher in the HPV-16 or level IV/V metastasis group 
compared with both the extracapsular spread or tumor depth â‰¥ 11-mm group and
patients without risk factors (P<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: HPV infections in advanced OSCC patients are not uncommon and
clinically relevant. Compared with HPV-16-negative advanced OSCC patients, those 
with a single HPV-16 infection are at higher risk of distant metastases and poor 
survival despite undergoing radiation-based adjuvant therapy and require a more
aggressive adjuvant treatment and a more thorough follow-up.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040767 
PMCID: PMC3395633
PMID: 22808258  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
