

2172. Hum Pathol. 2010 Dec;41(12):1742-8. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2010.06.001. Epub 2010
Sep 9.

Expression of ribonucleotide reductase M2 subunit in gastric cancer and effects
of RRM2 inhibition in vitro.

Morikawa T(1), Hino R, Uozaki H, Maeda D, Ushiku T, Shinozaki A, Sakatani T,
Fukayama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, the University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan.

Ribonucleotide reductase M2 subunit is one of two subunits that constitute
ribonucleotide reductase, the enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of
ribonucleotide 5'-diphosphates into 2'-deoxyribonucleotides, which are required
for DNA synthesis. This study was conducted to investigate the roles of
ribonucleotide reductase M2 subunit in gastric cancer. The expression of
ribonucleotide reductase M2 subunit protein was examined by immunohistochemistry.
In normal gastric mucosa, ribonucleotide reductase M2 subunit expression was
restricted to the neck regions of gastric pits and no expression was observed in 
the surface epithelium. Among 112 gastric cancer tissues, ribonucleotide
reductase M2 subunit overexpression (≥10% cancer cells stained) was observed in
72 cases (64.3%). Ribonucleotide reductase M2 subunit overexpression was
significantly associated with male sex (P = .015), presence of muscularis propria
invasion (P = .020), presence of Epstein-Barr virus (P = .045), expression of
survivin (P = .0014), and DNA methyltransferase 1 (P = .043), but not with age,
histology, tumor size, lymph node metastasis or expression of phosphatase and
tensin homolog, phosphorylated signal transducer, and activator of transcription 
3 or p53. Suppression of ribonucleotide reductase M2 subunit synthesis, using
small interfering RNA, inhibited the growth of 3 gastric cancer cell lines,
MKN-1, MKN-7, and SNU-719. Our data suggest that ribonucleotide reductase M2
subunit overexpression could be associated with the gastric cancer progression
and that suppression of its function is a potential therapeutic strategy in
gastric cancer.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2010.06.001 
PMID: 20825972  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
