

2173. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Nov;10(5):2580-6. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2495. Epub 2014 Aug 14.

Hepatitis B virus inhibits the expression of CD82 through hypermethylation of its
promoter in hepatoma cells.

Yu G(1), Bing Y(1), Li W(2), Xia L(3), Liu Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Research Center of Digestive Diseases, Zhongnan
Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei 430071, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Hubei Cancer Hospital, Wuhan, Hubei
430079, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine Oncology, Huangshi Central Hospital, Huangshi,
Hubei 435005, P.R. China.

The tumor suppressor gene CD82, also known as KAI1, may act as a general
suppressor of metastasis in numerous types of cancer. It is hypothesized that
downregulation of CD82 gene expression may be an important factor in the
induction of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), however the mechanism for this
requires further study. In the present study, the relative mRNA and protein
expression levels of the CD82 gene were determined in HCC and adjacent non‑tumor 
tissues. The association between the CD82 gene and the hepatitis B virus (HBV)
was also investigated, by quantitative polymerase chain reaction, western
blotting, luciferase reporter assays and mass spectrometry with matrix‑assisted
laser desorption/ionization time‑of‑flight mass array. CD82 expression was shown 
to be suppressed in response to HCC promoter methylation. Relative CD82 mRNA and 
protein expression levels were downregulated in HCC tissues (P<0.05). HBx protein
inhibited CD82 promoter activity and subsequently the mRNA and protein expression
levels. Furthermore, it was demonstrated that HBV could inhibit the expression of
CD82 at the transcriptional level, and repress the activity of the CD82 promoter 
through hypermethylation. In addition, the methyl enzyme inhibitor 5‑aza‑CdR
could induce the CD82 promoter activity and the relative expression level of CD82
mRNA, as observed by an increase in luciferase activity driven by the CD82
promoter. The observations of the present study suggest that hypermethylation of 
the CD82 promoter may be an event leading to the development of HCC. Low
expression of CD82 is likely to be involved in tumor progression. HBV may inhibit
the expression of CD82 through hypermethylation of the promoter in hepatoma
cells.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2495 
PMID: 25119390  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
