

2176. Oncotarget. 2016 Jul 12;7(28):43805-43819. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.9698.

Aberrant methylation-mediated silencing of microRNAs contributes to HPV-induced
anchorage independence.

Wilting SM(1), Miok V(1)(2), Jaspers A(1), Boon D(1), Sørgård H(1), Lando M(3),
Snoek BC(1), van Wieringen WN(2), Meijer CJ(1), Lyng H(3), Snijders PJ(1),
Steenbergen RD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, VU University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Radiation Biology, Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University
Hospital, Oslo, Norway.

Cervical cancer and a subset of anogenital and head-and-neck carcinomas are
caused by high-risk types of the human papillomavirus (hrHPV). During
hrHPV-induced malignant transformation keratinocytes become able to grow
anchorage independently, a tumorigenic trait at least partly associated with
inactivation of tumor suppressor genes. We used hrHPV-containing keratinocytes to
investigate the role of DNA methylation-mediated silencing of microRNAs (miRNAs) 
in the acquisition of anchorage independence.Anchorage dependent (n=11) and
independent passages (n=19) of 4 hrHPV-immortalized keratinocyte cell lines were 
treated with 2'-deoxy-5-azacytidine (DAC). Genome-wide miRNA expression profiles 
before and after treatment were compared to identify miRNAs silenced by
methylation. Bisulfite sequencing and methylation-specific PCR showed increased
methylation of hsa-mir-129-2/-137/-935/-3663/-3665 and -4281 in anchorage
independent HPV-transformed keratinocytes and cervical cancer cell lines. Mature 
miRNAs derived from hsa-mir-129-2/-137/-3663 and -3665 showed functional
relevance as they decreased anchorage independence in cervical cancer cell lines.
Cervical (pre)cancerous lesions demonstrated increased methylation of
hsa-mir-129-2/-935/-3663/-3665 and -4281, underlining the clinical relevance of
our findings.In conclusion, methylation-mediated silencing of tumor suppressive
miRNAs contributes to acquisition of an anchorage independent phenotype. This
study further substantiates the importance of miRNAs during early stages of
carcinogenesis and underlines their potential as both disease markers and
therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.9698 
PMCID: PMC5190061
PMID: 27270309  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
