
Conflict of interest statement: PJFS, RDMS and CJLMM have minority stake in
Self-Screen B.V., a spin-off company of VU University Medical Center Amsterdam.
PJFS has been on the speaker's bureau of Roche, Abbott, Gen-Probe, Qiagen and
Seegene. He is consultant for Crucell Holland B.V. CJLMM has participated in the 
sponsored speaker's bureau of Merck, GSK, Qiagen, Menarini, Seegene, and Roche,
and served occasionally on the scientific advisory board of GSK, Qiagen, Merck,
and Roche. CJLMM has occasionally been a consultant for Qiagen and Genticel and
is a minority shareholder of Diassay B.V. Formerly CJLMM was a minority
shareholder of Delphi Biosciences. All other authors have no conflicts of
interest to declare.


2177. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 Dec;94(50):e2187. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000002187.

Genomic Copy Number Variations Characterize the Prognosis of Both P16-Positive
and P16-Negative Oropharyngeal Squamous Cell Carcinoma After Curative Resection.

Rhie A(1), Park WS, Choi MK, Kim JH, Ryu J, Ryu CH, Kim JI, Jung YS.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biomedical Science, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Genomic Medicine Institute (GMI), Medical Research Center,
Seoul National University, Seoul (AR, J-IIK); Department of Pathology, Center for
Specific Organs Cancer, Hematologic Malignancy Branch, National Cancer Center,
Goyang, Gyeonggi (WSP, MKC); and Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck
Surgery, Graduate School of Cancer Science and Policy, Specific Organs Cancer
Branch, National Cancer Center, Goyang, Gyeonggi, Korea (J-HK, JR, CHR, Y-SJ).

Recently increasing high-risk HPV+ OSCC exhibits unique clinical and molecular
characteristics compared to HPV-unrelated (HPV-) counterpart. Genomic copy number
variations (CNVs), unique in HPV+ OSCCs, and their role for the prognosis
prediction remains poorly studied. Here, we analyzed the distinct genomic copy
number variations (CNVs) in human papillomavirus-related (HPV+) oropharyngeal
squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) and their role as a prognosticator after curative 
resection. For 58 consecutive, Korean OSCC patients that underwent surgery-based 
treatment with median 10 years of follow-up, HPV-related markers, and genome-wide
CNV analysis were analyzed. Clinical associations between the CNV profile and
survival analyses were followed. p16 expression predicted the overall survival
(OS) (hazard ratio [HR] = 0.27, confidence interval [CI]: 0.39-0.80, P = 0.0006) 
better than HPV L1 PCR (HR = 0.83, CI: 0.66-1.29, P = 0.64), smoking, or other
variables. Although the overall number of CNVs was not significantly different,
30 loci showed unique CNV patterns between the p16+ and p16- groups. A region
containing PRDM2 was amplified only in the p16+ group, whereas EGFR and 11q13.3
showed increased amplification in p16- counterpart. Loss of a locus containing
FGF18 led to a worse, but gain of region including CDK10 and RAD18 led to better 
overall survival (OS) in all OSCC patients. Meanwhile, subgroup analysis of p16+ 
OSCC revealed that amplification of regions harboring HRAS and loss of locus
bearing KDR led to better OS. p16+ OSCC exhibit distinct CNV patterns compared
with p16- counterpart. Specific patterns of CNVs predict better survival,
especially in p16+ OSCC. This might allow better insights of the outcome after
curative resection for HPV+ and HPV- OSCC.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000002187 
PMCID: PMC5058900
PMID: 26683928  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
