

2183. N Engl J Med. 2010 Jul 1;363(1):24-35. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0912217. Epub 2010 Jun 
7.

Human papillomavirus and survival of patients with oropharyngeal cancer.

Ang KK(1), Harris J, Wheeler R, Weber R, Rosenthal DI, Nguyen-TÃ¢n PF, Westra WH, 
Chung CH, Jordan RC, Lu C, Kim H, Axelrod R, Silverman CC, Redmond KP, Gillison
ML.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, USA.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2010 Jul 1;363(1):82-4.
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2010 Sep;7(9):481.
    Immunotherapy. 2011 Apr;3(4):469-73.
    Natl Med J India. 2011 Mar-Apr;24(2):88-90.
    N Engl J Med. 2010 Oct 14;363(16):1576.
    N Engl J Med. 2010 Oct 14;363(16):1576.

BACKGROUND: Oropharyngeal squamous-cell carcinomas caused by human papillomavirus
(HPV) are associated with favorable survival, but the independent prognostic
significance of tumor HPV status remains unknown.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective analysis of the association between tumor
HPV status and survival among patients with stage III or IV oropharyngeal
squamous-cell carcinoma who were enrolled in a randomized trial comparing
accelerated-fractionation radiotherapy (with acceleration by means of concomitant
boost radiotherapy) with standard-fractionation radiotherapy, each combined with 
cisplatin therapy, in patients with squamous-cell carcinoma of the head and neck.
Proportional-hazards models were used to compare the risk of death among patients
with HPV-positive cancer and those with HPV-negative cancer.
RESULTS: The median follow-up period was 4.8 years. The 3-year rate of overall
survival was similar in the group receiving accelerated-fractionation
radiotherapy and the group receiving standard-fractionation radiotherapy (70.3%
vs. 64.3%; P=0.18; hazard ratio for death with accelerated-fractionation
radiotherapy, 0.90; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.72 to 1.13), as were the
rates of high-grade acute and late toxic events. A total of 63.8% of patients
with oropharyngeal cancer (206 of 323) had HPV-positive tumors; these patients
had better 3-year rates of overall survival (82.4%, vs. 57.1% among patients with
HPV-negative tumors; P<0.001 by the log-rank test) and, after adjustment for age,
race, tumor and nodal stage, tobacco exposure, and treatment assignment, had a
58% reduction in the risk of death (hazard ratio, 0.42; 95% CI, 0.27 to 0.66).
The risk of death significantly increased with each additional pack-year of
tobacco smoking. Using recursive-partitioning analysis, we classified our
patients as having a low, intermediate, or high risk of death on the basis of
four factors: HPV status, pack-years of tobacco smoking, tumor stage, and nodal
stage.
CONCLUSIONS: Tumor HPV status is a strong and independent prognostic factor for
survival among patients with oropharyngeal cancer. (ClinicalTrials.gov number,
NCT00047008.)

2010 Massachusetts Medical Society

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa0912217 
PMCID: PMC2943767
PMID: 20530316  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
