

2184. Pediatr Dermatol. 2015 Jan-Feb;32(1):118-21. doi: 10.1111/pde.12124. Epub 2013
Mar 28.

Epidermodysplasia verruciformis in lipoid proteinosis: case report and discussion
of pathophysiology.

O'Blenes C(1), Pasternak S, Issekutz A, Gillis J, Chowdhury D, Finlayson L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Dermatology and Cutaneous Science, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 
Canada.

Lipoid proteinosis (LP) is a rare autosomal recessive genodermatosis caused by
mutations in extracellular matrix protein 1 (ECM1) that involves deposition of
basement membrane-like material in the skin and other organs. Epidermodysplasia
verruciformis (EV) is also a rare autosomal recessive genodermatosis involving
susceptibility to human papillomavirus (HPV) infections and squamous cell
carcinoma, caused in most cases by homozygous mutations in EVER1 or EVER2. We
describe a case of EV in a patient with LP and discuss the pathophysiology. A
3-year-old Lebanese girl presented with hoarseness, beaded papules along the
eyelid margins, waxy papules and plaques on her head and neck, and lichenoid
verrucous papules on the forearms and hands. Histopathology of the waxy papules
exhibited deposition of periodic acid Schiff-positive basement membrane-like
material in the superficial dermis, characteristic of LP. The verruca plana-like 
lesions exhibited acanthosis and enlarged keratinocytes with pale blue-grey
cytoplasm and a perinuclear halo, consistent with verrucae and EV. Polymerase
chain reaction amplification and sequencing of ECM1, EVER1, and EVER2
demonstrated a homozygous point mutation, c.389C>T (p.Thr130Met), in exon 6 of
ECM1 and a heterozygous point mutation, c.917 A>T (p.Asn306Ile), in exon 8 in
EVER2, known to cause EV in homozygous patients. The homozygous point mutation
c.389C>T in ECM1 may be a novel mutation causing LP. Verruca plana-like lesions
seen in LP appear to represent a form of acquired EV. In this patient, a
heterozygous mutation in EVER2 at c.917 A>T may also have conferred
susceptibility to HPV infection.

Â© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/pde.12124 
PMID: 23534907  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
