

2185. Zhonghua Shi Yan He Lin Chuang Bing Du Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Apr;24(2):88-90.

[Analysis of human rabies high-occurrence factors in Guangxi from 2004 to 2008].

[Article in Chinese]

Mo ZJ(1), Mo Y, Zhou KJ, Shen XX, Huang Y, Hao L, Tao XY, Yang JY, Tang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Guangxi Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Nanning 530028, China.

OBJECTIVE: Analysis the epidemiological characteristics on rabies cases occurred 
in Guangxi from 2004 to 2008 and summarize the result of healthy-dog infection
rabies virus investigation from 2006 to 2008. Exploring the high-occurrence and
correlated factors on rabies in Guangxi.
METHODS: Data collected from the National Disease Surveillance System and the
National Active Surveillance System for Rabies from 2004 to 2008 and Data of
healthy-dog infection rabies virus investigation from 2006 to 2008 were analyzed.
RESULTS: The total rabies cases were 2463 in Guangxi from 2004-2008 and average
incidence rate was 0.98 per 100 thousand per year. There were 95 counties had
rabies case reported, anyway more than 10 cases occurred county number was
declined while less than 5 cases rose year by year. The rabies case incidence
area was expanded and the cases in middle and west area of Guangxi rose
significantly. Rabies cases were reported whole year and no seasonal peak. Human 
rabies cases mainly were farmers, students and children. Yanger than 20 years old
and elder 40 years old were the highest age groups in the population of the
investigation, 83.79% cases were attacked by dogs. 78.5% cases classification
category III. 83.17% cases had exposed on the upper and lower limbs, 10.56%
exposed to the head, face or neck. But 67.88% cases did not receive any PEP and
only 18.31% cases vaccinated and 3.63% category III exposure cases combined
administration of RIG. The incubation median was 60 days. The rabies virus
infection rate among randomly collection healthy-dog brain samples from 2006 to
2008 was 1.92%, 0.93% and 0.89%.
CONCLUSION: Unsuccessful and inadequate PEP of patients were the main factors
leading to the high-occurrence of human rabies in Guangxi. And there are a lot of
infection rabies virus healthy-dogs alive in Guangxi also as a high-occurrence
factor.


PMID: 21110421  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
