

2187. Acta Otorhinolaryngol Ital. 2014 Oct;34(5):299-309.

HPV in oropharyngeal cancer: the basics to know in clinical practice.

Elrefaey S(1), Massaro MA(2), Chiocca S(3), Chiesa F(2), Ansarin M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, European Institute of
Oncology, Milano, Italy; ; Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery,
Alexandria University, Alexandria, Egypt;
(2)Division of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, European Institute of
Oncology, Milano, Italy;
(3)Department of Experimental Oncology, IFOM-IEO Campus, European Institute of
Oncology, Milano, Italy.

The incidence of oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) is rising in
contrast to the decreasing incidence of carcinomas in other subsites of the head 
and neck, in spite of the reduced prevalence of smoking. Human papilloma virus
(HPV) infection, and in particular type 16 (HPV-16), is now recognized as a
significant player in the onset of HPV positive OPSCC, with different
epidemiological, clinical, anatomical, radiological, behavioural, biological and 
prognostic characteristics from HPV negative OPSCC. Indeed, the only subsite in
the head and neck with a demonstrated aetiological viral link is, at present, the
oropharynx. These observations lead to questions regarding management choices for
patients based on tumour HPV status with important consequences on treatment, and
on the role of vaccines and targeted therapy over the upcoming years.

Publisher: L'incidenza del carcinoma spinocellulare dell'orofaringe (OPSCC) è in 
aumento in contrasto con la diminuzione dell'incidenza di carcinomi in altre sedi
del distretto cervico-facciale, nonostante la ridotta prevalenza del fumo.
L'infezione da Papilloma Virus Umano (HPV), in particolare di tipo 16 (HPV 16), è
ora riconosciuto come un importante fattore nell'insorgenza di HPV OPSCC
positivo, con diverse caratteristiche radiologiche, epidemiologiche, cliniche,
anatomiche, biologiche e prognostiche rispetto all'HPV OPSCC negativo. In effetti
l'unica sede del distretto cervico-facciale con un collegamento virale eziologico
dimostrato è, attualmente, l'orofaringe. Queste osservazioni portano a domande
riguardanti le scelte di gestione per i pazienti in base allo stato del tumore
HPV con importanti conseguenze sul trattamento e sul ruolo dei vaccini e terapia 
mirata per i prossimi anni.

PMCID: PMC4299160
PMID: 25709145  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
