

219. Curr Opin Oncol. 2009 May;21(3):201-5.

Human papillomavirus-related head and neck tumors: clinical and research
implication.

Psyrri A(1), Gouveris P, Vermorken JB.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Attikon University Hospital, Athens,
Greece. psyrri237@yahoo.com

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: High-risk human papillomaviruses (HPVs) are implicated in the 
development of a subset of head and neck squamous cell cancers (HNSCCs),
especially those arising from the lingual or palatine tonsils. HPV-associated
HNSCCs represent a different disease entity from those associated with the
traditional risk factors of tobacco and alcohol use. The demonstration that HPV
is causally associated with a subset of HNSCC has tremendous clinical and
research implications.
RECENT FINDINGS: In recent years, there has been an increase in the annual
incidence of HPV-related HNSCC in the United States and Europe. It has now become
clear that a subset of HNSCC is a sexually transmitted disease with distinct
pathogenesis and clinical/pathological features. HPV-associated HNSCCs have a
better prognosis compared with stage-matched non-HPV-related HNSCC in the
majority of studies. Research efforts are now focusing on deintensification of
treatment to reduce treatment-associated morbidity. HPV-targeted therapies are
under investigation.
SUMMARY: The increasing incidence of HPV-related HNSCC has led to the development
of novel research strategies in HNSCC. This review summarizes the epidemiology,
clinical presentation, molecular pathogenesis, diagnosis, and therapy of
HPV-associated HNSCC; it also summarizes how a better understanding of the
molecular pathogenesis of HPV-associated HNSCC is expected to change treatment.


PMID: 19370803  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
