

2192. Gene Ther. 2011 Mar;18(3):304-12. doi: 10.1038/gt.2010.151. Epub 2010 Oct 28.

Innovative DNA vaccine for human papillomavirus (HPV)-associated head and neck
cancer.

Wu A(1), Zeng Q, Kang TH, Peng S, Roosinovich E, Pai SI, Hung CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD
21231, USA.

Human papillomavirus (HPV), particularly type 16, has been associated with a
subset of head and neck cancers. The viral-encoded oncogenic proteins E6 and E7
represent ideal targets for immunotherapy against HPV-associated head and neck
cancers. DNA vaccines have emerged as attractive approaches for immunotherapy due
to its simplicity, safety and ease of preparation. Intradermal administration of 
DNA vaccine by means of gene gun represents an efficient method to deliver DNA
directly into dendritic cells for priming antigen-specific T cells. We have
previously shown that a DNA vaccine encoding an invariant chain (Ii), in which
the class II-associated Ii peptide (CLIP) region has been replaced by a
Pan-DR-epitope (PADRE) sequence to form Ii-PADRE, is capable of generating
PADRE-specific CD4+ T cells in vaccinated mice. In the current study, we
hypothesize that a DNA vaccine encoding Ii-PADRE linked to E6 (Ii-PADRE-E6) will 
further enhance E6-specific CD8+ T cell immune responses through PADRE-specific
CD4+ T-helper cells. We found that mice vaccinated with Ii-PADRE-E6 DNA generated
comparable levels of PADRE-specific CD4+ T-cell immune responses, as well as
significantly stronger E6-specific CD8+ T-cell immune responses and antitumor
effects against the lethal challenge of E6-expressing tumor compared with mice
vaccinated with Ii-E6 DNA. Taken together, our data indicate that vaccination
with Ii-E6 DNA with PADRE replacing the CLIP region is capable of enhancing the
E6-specific CD8+ T-cell immune response generated by the Ii-E6 DNA. Thus,
Ii-PADRE-E6 represents a novel DNA vaccine for the treatment of HPV-associated
head and neck cancer and other HPV-associated malignancies.

DOI: 10.1038/gt.2010.151 
PMCID: PMC3032008
PMID: 20981112  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
