

2199. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2017 Dec;66(12):1619-1629. doi:
10.1007/s00262-017-2054-3. Epub 2017 Aug 30.

Toll-like receptor 5 and 7 expression may impact prognosis of HPV-positive
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma patients.

Jouhi L(1), Mohamed H(2), Mäkitie A(3)(4), Remes SM(2), Haglund C(5)(6), Atula
T(3), Hagström J(2)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, University of Helsinki and
Helsinki University Hospital, P.O Box 263, 00029 HUS, Helsinki, Finland.
lauri.jouhi@helsinki.fi.
(2)Pathology, University of Helsinki, HUSLAB, and Helsinki University Hospital,
P.O Box 21, 00014 University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(3)Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, University of Helsinki and
Helsinki University Hospital, P.O Box 263, 00029 HUS, Helsinki, Finland.
(4)Division of Ear, Nose and Throat Diseases, Department of Clinical Sciences,
Intervention and Technology, Karolinska Institutet and Karolinska Hospital,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Surgery, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, P.O Box 22, 
00014 University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(6)Research Programs Unit, Translational Cancer Biology, University of Helsinki, 
P.O Box 63, 00014 University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

A large subset of oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas (OPSCCs) is associated
with HPV infection and has better outcome than non-viral-related tumors. Various 
malignancies also carry a role for TLRs, key activators of inflammation and
innate immunity. We examined the expression of TLRs in OPSCC, and their
association with HPV status and treatment outcome. TLR 5, 7, 9, and p16 were
studied by immunohistochemistry and HPV status was detected with in situ
hybridization in 202 tumors of consecutively treated OPSCC patients using tissue 
microarray method. The relations between TLR expression and HPV status, p16
expression, clinicopathological factors, and survival were analyzed. TLR 5, 7,
and 9 expression patterns differed between HPV-positive and -negative tumors, and
they were statistically significantly associated with history of smoking, heavy
drinking, tumor site, grade, size (T), metastasis (N), and stage. Moreover, in
HPV-positive tumors the expression of TLR 5 and 7 correlated with tumor
recurrence. After adjustment, among HPV-positive OPSCC patients, high TLR 5 and
low TLR 7 expression were associated with poor disease-specific survival. Our
results indicate that TLR 5 and 7 may have a role in the prognostication of
HPV-positive OPSCC, however, further studies are needed to clarify the
comprehensive role of these TLRs in OPSCC.

DOI: 10.1007/s00262-017-2054-3 
PMID: 28856441  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
