

2200. Mol Ther. 2014 Jun;22(6):1221-1229. doi: 10.1038/mt.2014.53. Epub 2014 Mar 25.

Multicenter randomized phase 2 clinical trial of a recombinant human endostatin
adenovirus in patients with advanced head and neck carcinoma.

Ye W(1), Liu R(1), Pan C(2), Jiang W(1), Zhang L(1), Guan Z(1), Wu J(1), Ying
X(1), Li L(1), Li S(1), Tan W(3), Zeng M(1), Kang T(1), Liu Q(1), Thomas GR(4),
Huang M(5), Deng W(1), Huang W(6).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation
Center of Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou,
China.
(2)Medical Oncology, Sichuan Cancer Hospital and Institute, Chengdu, China.
(3)School of Bioscience and Bioengineering, South China University of Technology,
Guangzhou, China.
(4)Marsala Biotech, Winnipeg, Canada.
(5)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Tumor-targeted Drug, Guangzhou
Enterprise Key Laboratory of Gene Medicine, Guangzhou Doublle Bioproducts,
Guangzhou, China.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation
Center of Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou,
China; CAS Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of
Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China. Electronic address:
huangwl@sysucc.org.cn.

A randomized, open-label, phase 2, multicenter clinical trial was conducted to
evaluate the efficacy and safety of the addition of a recombinant human
endostatin adenovirus (E10A) to cisplatin and paclitaxel in patients with
advanced head and neck squamous cell carcinoma or nasopharyngeal carcinoma.
Patients with locally advanced or metastatic head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma or nasopharyngeal carcinoma not suitable for operation or radiotherapy 
were randomly assigned to receive E10A plus chemotherapy every 3 weeks for a
maximum of six cycles or to receive chemotherapy only. One hundred and thirty-six
eligible patients were randomly assigned. The addition of E10A did not
significantly improve the objective response rate (29.9 versus 39.7%, P = 0.154).
However, patients who received endostatin had longer progression-free survival
(7.03 versus 3.60 months, P = 0.006; hazard ratio: 0.55). The combination of E10A
with chemotherapy benefited prior chemotherapy-treated patients and those who
received three to four treatment cycles (6.50 versus 3.43 months, P = 0.003; 8.27
versus 4.27 months, P = 0.018; respectively). The overall disease control rate
significantly increased from 80.6% in the control group to 92.6% in the test
group (P = 0.034). Except for fever, no adverse events were associated with the
E10A treatment. In summary, E10A plus chemotherapy is a safe and effective
therapeutic approach in patients with advanced head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma or nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

DOI: 10.1038/mt.2014.53 
PMCID: PMC4048902
PMID: 24662947  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
