

2203. Mod Pathol. 2009 May;22(5):686-98. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.23. Epub 2009 Mar 
20.

P21 Cip1/WAF1 expression is strongly associated with HPV-positive tonsillar
carcinoma and a favorable prognosis.

Hafkamp HC(1), Mooren JJ, Claessen SM, Klingenberg B, Voogd AC, Bot FJ, Klussmann
JP, Hopman AH, Manni JJ, Kremer B, Ramaekers FC, Speel EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, GROW-School for
Oncology and Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical Center,
Maastricht, The Netherlands.

Human papillomavirus is involved in the carcinogenesis of tonsillar squamous cell
carcinomas. Here, we investigated the expression and the prognostic value of key 
cell cycle proteins in the pRb and p53 pathways in both human papillomavirus type
16-positive and -negative tonsillar squamous cell carcinomas. Using
immunohistochemistry, 77 tonsillar squamous cell carcinomas with known human
papillomavirus type 16 status and clinical outcome were analyzed for expression
of Ki67, p16(INK4A,) cyclin D1, pRb, p14(ARF), MDM2, p53, p21(Cip1/WAF1), and
p27(KIP1). Results were correlated with each other and with clinical and
demographic patient data. A total of 35% of tonsillar carcinomas harbored
integrated human papillomavirus type 16 DNA and p16(INK4A) overexpression, both
being considered essential features for human papillomavirus association. These
tumors also showed the overexpression of p14(ARF) (P<0.0001) and p21(Cip1/WAF1)
(P=0.001), and downregulation of pRb (P<0.0001) and cyclin D1 (P=0.027) compared 
with the human papillomavirus-negative cases. Univariate Cox regression analyses 
revealed a favorable survival rate for non-smokers (P=0.006), as well as for
patients with T1-2 tumors (P<0.0001) or tumors showing low expression of cyclin
D1 (P=0.028), presence of human papillomavirus and overexpression of p16(INK4A)
(P=0.01), p14(ARF) (P=0.02) or p21(Cip1/WAF1) (P=0.004). In multivariate
regression analyses, smoking and tumor size, as well as expression of cyclin D1
and p21(Cip1/WAF1), were found to be independent prognostic markers. We conclude 
that human papillomavirus positivity in tonsillar squamous cell carcinomas
strongly correlates with p21(Cip1/WAF1) and p14(ARF) overexpression and
downregulation of pRb and cyclin D1. In particular p21(Cip1/WAF1) overexpression 
is an excellent favorable prognosticator in tonsillar squamous cell carcinomas.

DOI: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.23 
PMID: 19305381  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
