

2208. Acta Otolaryngol. 2013 Mar;133(3):297-304. doi: 10.3109/00016489.2012.741327.
Epub 2012 Nov 6.

p16 immunohistochemistry alone is a better prognosticator in tonsil cancer than
human papillomavirus in situ hybridization with or without p16
immunohistochemistry.

Park K(1), Cho KJ, Lee M, Yoon DH, Kim J, Kim SY, Nam SY, Choi SH, Roh JL, Han
MW, Lee SW, Song SY, Back JH, Kim SB.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Oncology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

CONCLUSIONS: p16 immunohistochemistry (IHC) status correlated with less exposure 
to smoking and/or alcohol in Korean patients with locally advanced tonsillar
squamous cell carcinoma (TSCC), and was an independent prognostic factor for
survival.
OBJECTIVE: TSCC is more likely to be human papillomavirus (HPV)-positive than
other head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) subtypes. The objective of
this study was to ascertain the HPV status of TSCC in Korean patients and to
determine its relationship with clinical parameters and prognosis.
METHODS: The locally advanced TSCCs of 79 patients who were treated between 2000 
and 2008 were tested by p16 IHC and HPV in situ hybridization (ISH) with a tissue
microarray.
RESULTS: Sixty-three patients (80%) were positive for p16 IHC, while 54 (68%)
were positive by HPV ISH. p16 IHC status correlated significantly with lower
exposure to smoking and alcohol (p < 0.05) but did not correlate with T and N
stage classification, histological differentiation, age, or gender. The
p16-positive group had a significantly higher 5-year overall survival rate in
comparison with the p16-negative group (78% vs 63%, hazard ratio (HR) = 0.347,
95% CI = 0.14, 95% Cp = 0.025). p16 IHC was a favorable independent prognostic
factor for overall survival, even after adjustment for age and T stage (HR =
0.283, 95% CI = 0.103, 95% p = 0.015).

DOI: 10.3109/00016489.2012.741327 
PMID: 23130632  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
