

221. Pathol Res Pract. 2016 Jun;212(6):524-31. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2016.03.002. Epub
2016 Mar 14.

Origin of cystic squamous cell carcinoma metastases in head and neck lymph nodes:
Addition of EBV testing improves diagnostic accuracy.

Švajdler M Jr(1), Kašpírková J(2), Hadravský L(2), Laco J(3), Dubinský P(4),
Straka Ľ(5), Ondič O(2), Michal M(2), Skálová A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Šikl's Department of Pathology, Charles University in Prague, The Faculty of
Medicine and Faculty Hospital in Pilsen, Czech Republic; Bioptická laboratoř,
s.r.o., Pilsen, Czech Republic; Department of Pathology, Louis Pasteur University
Hospital, Košice, Slovakia. Electronic address: svajdler@yahoo.com.
(2)Šikl's Department of Pathology, Charles University in Prague, The Faculty of
Medicine and Faculty Hospital in Pilsen, Czech Republic; Bioptická laboratoř,
s.r.o., Pilsen, Czech Republic.
(3)The Fingerland Department of Pathology, Charles University in Prague, The
Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital in Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, Oncology Institute, Košice, Slovakia.
(5)Klinická patológia Prešov, s.r.o., Prešov, Slovakia.

Most cases of cystic squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) metastases in the upper neck
are associated with an oropharyngeal primary, namely human papillomavirus
(HPV)-associated SCC arising in the palatine or lingual tonsil. A retrospective
study was performed on 22 patients who presented with cystic head and neck SCC
metastases. The purpose of the study was to find out whether histological
characteristics, p16 protein expression, HPV and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) status 
could be useful in predicting the localization of the primary tumor. The primary 
site was identified in 20 of 22 patients and included the oropharynx in 14
patients (63.6%), the nasopharynx in 3 patients (13.6%), the lungs in 2 cases
(9%), and the skin of the auricle in one case (4.5%). No primary was found in two
patients (9%). Sixteen of 17 cases (94.1%) originating in Waldayer's ring
(oropharynx and nasopharynx), and both cases with an unknown primary showed
morphology of non-keratinizing SCC or non-keratinizing SCC with maturation. All
tumors with oropharyngeal primary and both cases with unknown primary showed
diffuse p16 staining and presence of HPV DNA. All three cystic metastases of
nasopharyngeal carcinoma were EBV-positive and p16/HPV-negative. In contrast,
cutaneous and pulmonary metastases showed morphology of a well differentiated
keratinizing SCC and poorly differentiated keratinizing SCC, respectively, and
were HPV/EBV-negative. We confirmed that cystic SCC lymph node metastases of the 
head and neck region are strongly associated with the occult primary localized in
the oropharynx. The oropharyngeal origin should always be corroborated by p16
immunohistochemistry and HPV-specific testing because SCC arising in other sites,
such as nasopharynx, skin or lungs may manifest with cystic neck metastases as
well. Addition of EBV testing in p16/HPV-negative cases can disclose the
nasopharyngeal origin of the cystic neck metastases in a subset of cases.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prp.2016.03.002 
PMID: 27013059  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
