

2212. Oncol Rep. 2012 Jul;28(1):172-8. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.1766. Epub 2012 Apr 20.

Alteration of MMP-2 and -14 expression by imatinib in HPV-positive and -negative 
squamous cell carcinoma.

Faber A(1), Sauter A, Hoedt S, Hoermann K, Erben P, Hofheinz RD, Sommer U,
Stern-Straeter J, Schultz DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University Medical
Centre Mannheim, D-68167 Mannheim, Germany. faberanne@gmx.de

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is an aggressive epithelial
malignancy. It is known to be the most common neoplasm appearing in the upper
aerodigestive tract. The poor 5â€‘year survival rate has remained unchanged in the 
last decades even though improved techniques in surgery, radiation and
chemotherapy have been established. In contrast to the overall decreasing
incidence of head and neck cancer in the US, the incidence of HPV-associated
oropharyngeal cancer is increasing, indicating the importance of viral etiology. 
Furthermore, growth and invasion of HNSCC are strongly influenced by the
extracellular matrix (ECM). Matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) have been shown to
play key roles in the remodeling of the ECM. Imatinib (STI 571) was originally
designed to inhibit the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase in chronic myeloid leukaemia. But
it also has an inhibitory impact, e.g., on the protein-tyrosine-kinase (PTK)
receptor c-kit and on its PTK activity in HNSCC. In this study, we incubated the 
HNSCC cell lines HNSCC 11A and 14C and the p16-positive SCC line CERV196 with
increasing concentrations of imatinib or carboplatin. After an incubation time of
up to 10 days, we evaluated MMP-2 and -14 expression by ELISA techniques and
immunohistochemistry. MMP-2 and -14 expression was demonstrated in all incubated 
tumor cell lines. Especially incubation with imatinib resulted in a significant
decrease in MMP expression in incubated cell lines. Our results indicate that the
expression of MMP-2 and -14 is suppressed in the presence of imatinib. Thus,
imatinib may exert in part its inhibitory effect on malignant cell growth via the
blockage of the signal transduction of PTK receptors. Further studies are
warranted, especially keeping in mind the moderate toxicity of imatinib.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2012.1766 
PMID: 22576800  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
