

2217. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2011 May;268(5):721-6. doi: 10.1007/s00405-010-1396-7.
Epub 2010 Oct 12.

Impact of HPV infection on the clinical outcome of p-CAIR trial in head and neck 
cancer.

Snietura M(1), Piglowski W, Jaworska M, Mucha-Malecka A, Wozniak G, Lange D,
Suwinski R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumour Pathology, Center of Oncology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie
Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Gliwice Branch, Gliwice,
Poland.

The purpose of the study was to analyse the influence of HPV infection on the
outcome of a randomized clinical trial of conventional (CF) versus 7-days-a-week 
postoperative radiotherapy (p-CAIR) for squamous cell cancer of the head and neck
(SCCHN). Between 2001 and 2004, 279 patients with high-risk SCC of the larynx or 
cancer of the oral cavity/oropharynx were randomized to receive 63 Gy in
fractions of 1.8 Gy given 5 days a week or 7 days a week (Radiother Oncol
87:155-163, 2008). The presence of HPV DNA in 131 archival paraffin blocks was
assessed with multiplex quantitative real-time PCR using five consensus primers
for the conservative L1 region and molecular beacon probes targeting 14 high-risk
HPV subtypes. Following the RT-PCR procedure, we could determine the presence and
type of HPV16, HPV18 and the other 12 less frequent oncogenic subtypes. Out of
131 samples, 9 were positive for HPV infection (6.9%), all of them with HPV16
subtype. None of the 65 laryngeal tumours was HPV positive. The 5-year LRC in
HPV-positive patients was 100%, compared to 58% in the HPV-negative group (p =
0.02, log-rank test). Amongst 122 patients with HPV-negative tumours, 5-year LRC 
was 50.3% in p-CF versus 65.2 in p-CAIR (p = 0.37). HPV infection was associated 
with low expression of EGFR and cyclin D. This study demonstrates a favourable
outcome for HPV-positive patients with SCCHN treated with postoperative
radiotherapy. While considering the small number of HPV+ tumours, the data set
can be considered as hypothesis generating only, the outcome raises new questions
on the necessity of aggressive postoperative treatment in HPV+ patients.

Â© The Author(s) 2010

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-010-1396-7 
PMCID: PMC3071948
PMID: 20938670  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
