

2221. Int J Cancer. 2013 Feb 15;132(4):882-90. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27739. Epub 2012 Sep 7.

A novel RT-PCR method for quantification of human papillomavirus transcripts in
archived tissues and its application in oropharyngeal cancer prognosis.

Gao G(1), Chernock RD, Gay HA, Thorstad WL, Zhang TR, Wang H, Ma XJ, Luo Y, Lewis
JS Jr, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine, St
Louis, MO 63108, USA.

Oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is strongly associated with human
papillomavirus (HPV) infection, which is distinctively different from most other 
head and neck cancers. However, a robust quantitative reverse transcription PCR
(RT-qPCR) method for comprehensive expression profiling of HPV genes in routinely
fixed tissues has not been reported. To address this issue, we have established a
new real-time RT-PCR method for the expression profiling of the E6 and E7
oncogenes from 13 high-risk HPV types. This method was validated in cervical
cancer and by comparison with another HPV RNA detection method (in situ
hybridization) in oropharyngeal tumors. In addition, the expression profiles of
selected HPV-related human genes were also analyzed. HPV E6 and E7 expression
profiles were then analyzed in 150 archived oropharyngeal SCC samples and
compared with other variables and with patient outcomes. Our study showed that
RT-qPCR and RNA in situ hybridization were 100% concordant in determining HPV
status. HPV transcriptional activity was found in most oropharyngeal SCC (81.3%),
a prevalence that is higher than in previous studies. Besides HPV16, three other 
HPV types were also detected, including 33, 35 and 18. Furthermore, HPV and p16
had essentially identical expression signatures, and both HPV and p16 were
prognostic biomarkers for the prediction of disease outcome. Thus, p16 mRNA or
protein expression signature is a sensitive and specific surrogate marker for HPV
transcriptional activity (all genotypes combined).

Copyright Â© 2012 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.27739 
PMCID: PMC3498587
PMID: 22821242  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
