

2223. PLoS Pathog. 2016 Jul 27;12(7):e1005801. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005801.
eCollection 2016 Jul.

KSHV-Mediated Regulation of Par3 and SNAIL Contributes to B-Cell Proliferation.

Jha HC(1), Sun Z(1), Upadhyay SK(1), El-Naccache DW(1), Singh RK(1), Sahu SK(1), 
Robertson ES(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Cancer, and Tumor Virology
Program and Tumor Virology Program, Abramson Cancer Center, Perelman School of
Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United
States of America.

Studies have suggested that Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) and
transformation is an important step in progression to cancer. Par3
(partitioning-defective protein) is a crucial factor in regulating epithelial
cell polarity. However, the mechanism by which the latency associated nuclear
antigen (LANA) encoded by Kaposi's Sarcoma associated herpesvirus (KSHV)
regulates Par3 and EMTs markers (Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition) during
viral-mediated B-cell oncogenesis has not been fully explored. Moreover, several 
studies have demonstrated a crucial role for EMT markers during B-cell
malignancies. In this study, we demonstrate that Par3 is significantly
up-regulated in KSHV-infected primary B-cells. Further, Par3 interacted with LANA
in KSHV positive and LANA expressing cells which led to translocation of Par3
from the cell periphery to a predominantly nuclear signal. Par3 knockdown led to 
reduced cell proliferation and increased apoptotic induction. Levels of SNAIL was
elevated, and E-cadherin was reduced in the presence of LANA or Par3.
Interestingly, KSHV infection in primary B-cells led to enhancement of SNAIL and 
down-regulation of E-cadherin in a temporal manner. Importantly, knockdown of
SNAIL, a major EMT regulator, in KSHV cells resulted in reduced expression of
LANA, Par3, and enhanced E-cadherin. Also, SNAIL bound to the promoter region of 
p21 and can regulate its activity. Further a SNAIL inhibitor diminished NF-kB
signaling through upregulation of Caspase3 in KSHV positive cells in vitro. This 
was also supported by upregulation of SNAIL and Par3 in BC-3 transplanted
NOD-SCID mice which has potential as a therapeutic target for KSHV-associated
B-cell lymphomas.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005801 
PMCID: PMC4963126
PMID: 27463802  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
