
Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


2230. Clin Cancer Res. 2010 Feb 1;16(3):1016-24. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-2796.
Epub 2010 Jan 26.

Plasma EBV DNA clearance rate as a novel prognostic marker for
metastatic/recurrent nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Wang WY(1), Twu CW, Chen HH, Jan JS, Jiang RS, Chao JY, Liang KL, Chen KW, Wu CT,
Lin JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Hung Kuang University,Taiwan.

PURPOSE: To investigate the prognostic effect of the concentrations and clearance
rates of plasma EBV DNA in metastatic/recurrent nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC).
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Thirty relapsed and four previously nontreated metastatic
NPC patients were treated according to the consensus guidelines of the head and
neck cancer team in our hospital (i.v. chemotherapy first, followed by local
irradiation boost and oral maintenance chemotherapy where applicable). Multiple
plasma samples were collected during the first month of chemotherapy. Circulating
EBV DNA concentrations were measured by a real-time quantitative PCR. The
half-life values (t(1/2)) of plasma EBV DNA clearance were calculated. The
associations between clinical outcome and plasma EBV DNA assays were analyzed.
RESULTS: Tumor response evaluated after 12 weeks of treatment showed 14 complete 
responses (41.2%), 12 partial responses (35.3%), 7 stable diseases (20.6%), and 1
progression disease (2.9%). The plasma EBV DNA concentrations have no significant
effects on outcome prediction. The t(1/2) of plasma EBV DNA clearance ranged from
1.85 to 28.29 days (median, 3.99). Patients with a short t(1/2) of plasma EBV DNA
clearance have significantly higher complete response rate and overall survival
than those with long t(1/2). Multivariate analysis revealed a significant effect 
of the t(1/2) of plasma EBV DNA clearance on survival.
CONCLUSIONS: The clearance rates of plasma EBV DNA during the first month of
chemotherapy can predict tumor response and patient survival. Early change of
chemotherapy regimen may be considered for patients with slow plasma EBV DNA
clearance rate.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-2796 
PMID: 20103659  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
