

2235. Int J Cancer. 2009 Oct 15;125(8):1884-93. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24567.

STAT3 activation contributes directly to Epstein-Barr virus-mediated invasiveness
of nasopharyngeal cancer cells in vitro.

Lui VW(1), Wong EY, Ho Y, Hong B, Wong SC, Tao Q, Choi GC, Au TC, Ho K, Yau DM,
Ma BB, Hui EP, Chan AS, Tsang CM, Tsao SW, Grandis JR, Chan AT.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Signaling Laboratory, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, 
Department of Clinical Oncology, Sir YK Pao Center for Cancer, Hong Kong Cancer
Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong SAR, China.

Nasopharyngeal cancer (NPC) is an Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated head and
neck cancer prevalent in Asia. Although with reasons not fully understood, the
intrinsic invasiveness of NPC is believed to be EBV-linked. Recently, EBV was
found to induce STAT3 activation. Constitutive STAT3 activation correlated with
advanced clinical staging in NPC. We hypothesized that STAT3 activation by EBV
directly contributes to the intrinsic invasiveness of NPC cells.
Phospho-STAT3-Tyr705 was detected in high percentage of NPC tumors (7/10 cases). 
Using a paired NPC cell line model, HONE-1 and the EBV-infected counterpart,
HONE-1-EBV, we found that HONE-1-EBV expressed a higher level of
phospho-STAT3-Tyr705 and was approximately 11-fold more invasive than HONE-1. In 
HONE-1-EBV, STAT3 siRNA targeting inhibited both spontaneous and serum-induced
invasion, as well as cell growth. Conversely, activation of STAT3 (by expressing 
an activated STAT3 mutant, namely STAT3C) in the parental HONE-1, mimicking
EBV-induced STAT3 activation, significantly enhanced its invasiveness and
proliferation, which was accompanied by increased expression of markers of
mesenchymal status, proliferation and anti-apoptosis. Our results demonstrated
that EBV-induced STAT3 activation is responsible for NPC cell proliferation and
invasion. This was further confirmed by a small molecule inhibitor of JAK/STAT3, 
JSI-124. JSI-124 inhibited STAT3 activation in HONE-1-EBV, with subsequent growth
inhibition, induction of PARP cleavage, abrogation of anchorage-independent
growth and invasion. We found that EBV-independent activation of STAT3 by a
growth factor, EGF, also contributed to NPC invasion. In conclusion, EBV-induced 
STAT3 activation directly contributes to the intrinsic invasiveness of NPC cells 
and STAT3 targeting may be beneficial in treating aggressive NPC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.24567 
PMID: 19588483  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
