

2249. Virchows Arch. 2014 Sep;465(3):299-312. doi: 10.1007/s00428-014-1630-6. Epub 2014
Jul 16.

Immunologic and metabolic characteristics of HPV-negative and HPV-positive head
and neck squamous cell carcinomas are strikingly different.

Krupar R(1), Robold K, Gaag D, Spanier G, Kreutz M, Renner K, Hellerbrand C,
Hofstaedter F, Bosserhoff AK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Regensburg, Franz-Josef-Strauss-Allee
11, 93053, Regensburg, Germany, rosemarie.krupar@ukr.de.

An HPV infection is involved in the etiology of about 25 % of head and neck
squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC). It has been postulated that a strong
antitumoral immune response in HPV-positive tumors represents an important
underlying mechanism for their good response to therapy. Recently, the Warburg
phenomenon has returned to the center of attention because it affects antitumoral
immune response and response to therapy. Accumulation of tumor cell-derived
lactate inhibits cytotoxic T cells, as these, analogous to cancer cells, depend
on glycolysis and lactate secretion for fulfillment of energy needs. Sparse
information exists on the Warburg effect in HNSCC. This study aimed to
characterize the metabolic and immunological features of HPV-negative and
HPV-positive HNSCC. An immunohistochemical analysis of oropharyngeal carcinomas
showed an enhanced antitumoral immune response (CD8/CD4 ratio) together with
increased levels of proteins involved in transmembranous metabolite
transportation (GLUT1 and CD147) and respiratory metabolism (COX5B) in
HPV-positive tumors as compared to HPV-negative tumors. mRNA and Western blot
analyses of an HPV-positive and HPV-negative HNSCC cell line revealed metabolic
characteristics similar to the in vivo situation. Additionally, the HPV-negative 
cell line showed stronger extracellular lactate accumulation. In contrast, the
HPV-positive cell line presented with better adaption to lactic acidosis
suggesting an ability to metabolize lactate. Our results indicate that
HPV-positive and HPV-negative carcinomas do not only differ in terms of tumor
immune microenvironment, but also in terms of tumor metabolism, characterized by 
an increased glucose and respiratory metabolism together with decreased lactate
accumulation in HPV-positive HNSCC. Therefore, targeting metabolic pathways could
represent a promising adjunct in the therapy of HPV-positive HNSCC.

DOI: 10.1007/s00428-014-1630-6 
PMID: 25027580  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
