

2250. Med Oncol. 2017 Nov 15;34(12):197. doi: 10.1007/s12032-017-1057-4.

Association of DNA repair genes polymorphisms and mutations with increased risk
of head and neck cancer: a review.

Dylawerska A(1), Barczak W(2)(3), Wegner A(4), Golusinski W(4), Suchorska
WM(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Radiobiology Lab, Department of Medical Physics, The Greater Poland Cancer
Centre, Garbary 15 Str., 61-866, Poznan, Poland.
(2)Radiobiology Lab, Department of Medical Physics, The Greater Poland Cancer
Centre, Garbary 15 Str., 61-866, Poznan, Poland. wojciech.barczak@wco.pl.
(3)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, The Greater Poland Cancer Centre, Poznan 
University of Medical Sciences, Garbary 15 Str., 61-866, Poznan, Poland.
wojciech.barczak@wco.pl.
(4)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, The Greater Poland Cancer Centre, Poznan 
University of Medical Sciences, Garbary 15 Str., 61-866, Poznan, Poland.
(5)Department of Electroradiology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Garbary
15 Str., 61-866, Poznan, Poland.

DNA repair mechanisms allow maintain genomic stability and proper functioning
within the cells. Any aberrations may cause an increased risk of many diseases
such as cancer. The most crucial risk factors for head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma are behavioral factors, predominantly chronic exposure to tobacco,
alcohol addiction, and infection with human papillomavirus or Epstein-Barr virus.
These agents can induce DNA damage; therefore, cells must activate appropriate
mechanisms in order to function correctly. Cancer cells are marked with genomic
instability, which is associated with a greater tendency for the accumulation of 
a DNA damage and increased chemo- and radioresistance. Multiple studies have
assessed the correlation of increased head and neck cancer (HNC) risk with
polymorphism in the DNA repair genes. However, they suggest that interaction of
DNA repair genes mutations with susceptibility to HNC depends on a patient's race
and risk factors, especially tobacco smoking. Further identification of these
sequence variations must be performed. In this review, we discuss the current
knowledge about the DNA repair genes mutations and polymorphisms associated with 
the high risk of head and neck treatment.

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-017-1057-4 
PMCID: PMC5688183
PMID: 29143133  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
