

2253. Cancer Med. 2015 Jan;4(1):43-55. doi: 10.1002/cam4.335. Epub 2014 Nov 21.

Global methylation silencing of clustered proto-cadherin genes in cervical
cancer: serving as diagnostic markers comparable to HPV.

Wang KH(1), Lin CJ, Liu CJ, Liu DW, Huang RL, Ding DC, Weng CF, Chu TY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, Center for Cervical Cancer Prevention, Buddhist Tzu
Chi General Hospital, Hualien, Taiwan; Institute of Medical Sciences, School of
Medicine, Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan.

Epigenetic remodeling of cell adhesion genes is a common phenomenon in cancer
invasion. This study aims to investigate global methylation of cell adhesion
genes in cervical carcinogenesis and to apply them in early detection of cancer
from cervical scraping. Genome-wide methylation array was performed on an
investigation cohort, including 16 cervical intraepithelial neoplasia 3 (CIN3)
and 20 cervical cancers (CA) versus 12 each of normal, inflammation and CIN1 as
controls. Twelve members of clustered proto-cadherin (PCDH) genes were
collectively methylated and silenced, which were validated in cancer cells of the
cervix, endometrium, liver, head and neck, breast, and lung. In an independent
cohort including 107 controls, 66 CIN1, 85 CIN2/3, and 38 CA, methylated PCDHA4
and PCDHA13 were detected in 2.8%, 24.2%, 52.9%, and 84.2% (P < 10(-25) ), and
2.8%, 24.2%, 50.6%, and 94.7% (P < 10(-29) ), respectively. In diagnosis of CIN2 
or more severe lesion of the cervix, a combination test of methylated PCDHA4 or
PCDHA13 from cervical scraping had a sensitivity, specificity, positive
predictive value, and negative predictive value of 74.8%, 80.3%, 73%, and 81.8%, 
respectively. Testing of this combination from cervical scraping is equally
sensitive but more specific than human papillomavirus (HPV) test in diagnosis of 
CIN2 or more severe lesions. The study disclosed a collective methylation of PCDH
genes in cancer of cervix and other sites. At least two of them can be promising 
diagnostic markers for cervical cancer noninferior to HPV.

© 2014 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cam4.335 
PMCID: PMC4312117
PMID: 25418975  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
