

2257. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2009 Sep;2(9):776-81. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-09-0149. Epub 2009 Jul 29.

Racial survival disparity in head and neck cancer results from low prevalence of 
human papillomavirus infection in black oropharyngeal cancer patients.

Settle K(1), Posner MR, Schumaker LM, Tan M, Suntharalingam M, Goloubeva O,
Strome SE, Haddad RI, Patel SS, Cambell EV 3rd, Sarlis N, Lorch J, Cullen KJ.

Author information: 
(1)University of Maryland Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum Cancer Center,
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2009 Sep;2(9):769-72.

The burden of squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN) is greater for
blacks than for whites, especially in oropharyngeal cases. We previously showed
retrospectively that disease-free survival was significantly greater in white
than in black SCCHN patients treated with chemoradiation, the greatest difference
occurring in the oropharyngeal subgroup. Oropharyngeal cancer is increasing in
incidence and in its association with human papillomavirus (HPV) infection;
HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer patients have significantly better outcomes
(versus HPV-negative). These collective data led to the present analyses of
overall survival (OS) in our retrospective cohort and of OS and HPV status
(tested prospectively in pretreatment biopsy specimens) in the phase 3,
multicenter TAX 324 trial of induction chemotherapy followed by concurrent
chemoradiation in SCCHN patients. Median OS in the retrospective cohort of 106
white and 95 black SCCHN patients was 52.1 months (white) versus only 23.7 months
(black; P = 0.009), due entirely to OS in the subgroup of patients with
oropharyngeal cancer--69.4 months (whites) versus 25.2 months (blacks; P =
0.0006); no significant difference by race occurred in survival of
non-oropharyngeal SCCHN (P = 0.58). In TAX 324, 196 white patients and 28 black
patients could be assessed for HPV status. Median OS was significantly worse for 
black patients (20.9 months) than for white patients (70.6 months; P = 0.03) and 
dramatically improved in HPV-positive (not reached) versus HPV-negative (26.6
months, 5.1 hazard ratio) oropharyngeal patients (P < 0.0001), 49% of whom were
HPV-16 positive. Overall, HPV positivity was 34% in white versus 4% in black
patients (P = 0.0004). Survival was similar for black and white HPV-negative
patients (P = 0.56). This is the first prospective assessment of confirmed HPV
status in black versus white SCCHN patients. Worse OS for black SCCHN patients
was driven by oropharyngeal cancer outcomes, and that for black oropharyngeal
cancer patients by a lower prevalence of HPV infection. These findings have
important implications for the etiology, prevention, prognosis, and treatment of 
SCCHN.

DOI: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-09-0149 
PMCID: PMC4459126
PMID: 19641042  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
