

2258. Radiother Oncol. 2013 Sep;108(3):489-94. doi: 10.1016/j.radonc.2013.08.036. Epub 
2013 Sep 20.

Expression of EGFR and HPV-associated p16 in oropharyngeal carcinoma: correlation
and influence on prognosis after radiotherapy in the randomized DAHANCA 5 and 7
trials.

Lassen P(1), Overgaard J, Eriksen JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Clinical Oncology, Aarhus University Hospital,
Denmark.

AIM: EGFR and HPV-associated p16 are among the most investigated biomarkers in
head and neck cancer. The aim was to investigate the correlation and interaction 
between these two markers and to evaluate their potential prognostic significance
when combined.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: 336 Oropharyngeal carcinomas treated with primary
radiotherapy (66-68 Gy, 2fx/day, 10-12 Gy/week) and with known EGFR/p16-status
estimated semiquantitatively by immunohistochemistry were included in the study. 
Data were evaluated by EGFR-expression (high/low) and p16-status
(positive/negative) consequently dividing tumours into four groups by combination
of the biomarkers. Patient/tumour characteristics and complete 5-year follow-up
were available.
RESULTS: Low EGFR-expression was significantly more common in p16-positive
tumours compared to p16-negative, p < 0.0001. p16 positivity showed a strong
prognostic impact (p < 0.0001, HR = 0.22 [0.13-0.38]), whereas EGFR was a weak
prognostic marker when local control was used as endpoint (p = 0.03, HR = 0.53
[0.29-0.94]). Combination of EGFR/p16 did not add significant information to p16 
alone and by multivariable analysis only p16 showed significant prognostic
information for all evaluated endpoints.
CONCLUSIONS: Both EGFR and p16 bear prognostic information in oropharyngeal
cancer, although p16 is, by far, the strongest prognostic factor. The markers
seem to be correlated and this might have influence when evaluating the effect of
EGFR inhibition in oropharyngeal tumours.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.radonc.2013.08.036 
PMID: 24060179  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
