

2259. Mod Pathol. 2012 Nov;25(11):1526-33. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2012.103. Epub 2012
Jun 8.

p16 expression is not associated with human papillomavirus in urinary bladder
squamous cell carcinoma.

Alexander RE(1), Hu Y, Kum JB, Montironi R, Lopez-Beltran A, Maclennan GT, Idrees
MT, Emerson RE, Ulbright TM, Grignon DG, Eble JN, Cheng L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Squamous cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder is unusual and of unknown
etiology. There is a well-established association between human papillomavirus
(HPV) infection and the development of cervical and head/neck squamous cell
carcinomas. However, the role of HPV in the pathogenesis of squamous cell
carcinoma of the urinary bladder is uncertain. The purposes of this study were to
investigate the possible role of HPV in the development of squamous cell
carcinoma of the urinary bladder and to determine if p16 expression could serve
as a surrogate marker for HPV in this malignancy. In all, 42 cases of squamous
cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder and 27 cases of urothelial carcinoma with
squamous differentiation were investigated. HPV infection was analyzed by both in
situ hybridization at the DNA level and immunohistochemistry at the protein
level. p16 protein expression was analyzed by immunohistochemistry. HPV DNA and
protein were not detected in 42 cases of squamous cell carcinoma (0%, 0/42) or 27
cases of urothelial carcinoma with squamous differentiation (0%, 0/15). p16
expression was detected in 13 cases (31%, 13/42) of squamous cell carcinoma and 9
cases (33%, 9/27) of urothelial carcinoma with squamous differentiation. There
was no correlation between p16 expression and the presence of HPV infection in
squamous cell carcinoma of the bladder or urothelial carcinoma with squamous
differentiation. Our data suggest that HPV does not play a role in the
development of squamous cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder or urothelial
carcinoma with squamous differentiation. p16 expression should not be used as a
surrogate marker for evidence of HVP infection in either squamous cell carcinoma 
of the urinary bladder or urothelial carcinoma with squamous differentiation as
neither HVP DNA nor protein is detectable in these neoplasms.

DOI: 10.1038/modpathol.2012.103 
PMID: 22684221  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
