

2263. Cancer. 2017 Oct 15;123(20):4013-4021. doi: 10.1002/cncr.30828. Epub 2017 Jun 13.

Elevated risk of human papillomavirus-related second cancers in survivors of anal
canal cancer.

Nelson RA(1), Lai LL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Information Sciences, City of Hope, Duarte, California.
(2)Department of Surgery, City of Hope, Duarte, California.

BACKGROUND: Over the last decade, the causal link between human papillomavirus
(HPV) infection and squamous cell carcinoma of the anus (SCCA) has been well
described. Because HPV infection in one site is often associated with other sites
of infection, it then follows that patients with SCCA may have an increased risk 
of additional HPV-related cancers. Identifying and targeting at-risk sites
through cancer screening and surveillance may help to guide best practices. The
current study sought to ascertain sites and risk of HPV-related second primary
malignancies (SPMs) in survivors of SCCA.
METHODS: Using population-based data from 1992 through 2012, the authors
identified patients with SCCA and determined their risk of HPV-related SPMs,
including anal, oral, and genital cancers. Standardized incidence ratios (SIRs), 
defined as observed to expected cases, were calculated to determine excess risk.
RESULTS: Of 10,537 patients with SCCA, 416 developed HPV-related SPMs, which
corresponded to an overall SIR of 21.5 (99% confidence interval [99% CI],
19.0-24.2). Men were found to have a higher SIR (35.8; 99% CI, 30.7-41.6)
compared with women (12.8; 99% CI, 10.4-15.5). SIRs for a second SCCA were
markedly higher in men (127.5; 99% CI, 108.1-149.2) compared with women (47.0;
99% CI, 34.7-62.1), whereas SIRs for oral cavity and pharyngeal cancers were
elevated in men (3.1; 99% CI, 1.5-5.7) and women (4.4; 99% CI, 1.5-9.7). SIRs for
sex-specific sites also were elevated, with male genital cancers having an SIR of
19.6 (99% CI, 8.7-37.6) and female genital cancers an SIR of 8.3 (99% CI,
6.1-11.0).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with index SCCA are at an increased risk of subsequent
HPV-related SPMs. The elevated risk is most striking in patients with second
primary SCCAs; however, the risk of second cancers also appears to be increased
in other HPV-related sites. Cancer 2017;123:4013-21. © 2017 American Cancer
Society.

© 2017 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.30828 
PMID: 28608917  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
