

2265. Int J Clin Oncol. 2014 Apr;19(2):211-9. doi: 10.1007/s10147-013-0660-4. Epub 2014
Jan 21.

Is biomarker research advancing in the era of personalized medicine for head and 
neck cancer?

Yokota T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastrointestinal Oncology, Shizuoka Cancer Center, 1007
Shimonagakubo Nagaizumi Sunto-gun, Shizuoka, 411-8777, Japan, t.yokota@scchr.jp.

Recent progress in molecular biology and translational research has initiated an 
era of personalized medicine in head and neck clinical oncology. The genetic
information defined by biomarker analysis in tumors and individuals is
indispensable for the administration of molecular targeting agents. The epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling pathway is an important therapeutic
target in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). The use of an anti-EGFR 
monoclonal antibody (mAb), cetuximab (Cmab), has been approved for the treatment 
of patients with head and neck cancer. Although KRAS mutation has been
established as a potential biomarker for predicting the efficacy of anti-EGFR mAb
in colorectal cancer, little is known about predictive markers for Cmab in head
and neck cancer. Optimal predictive and prognostic markers as well as safety
markers are required to promote the appropriate clinical use of Cmab and to
determine malignant phenotypes in head and neck cancer. This article first
reviews the role of EGFR signaling in HNSCC. The article then focuses on
Ras/Raf/Mek/Erk and PTEN/PI3K/Akt signaling pathways as predictive markers for
Cmab. Subsequently, the molecular basis and clinical outcome of human
papillomavirus (HPV)-positive cancer is highlighted, and the potential role of
anti-EGFR target therapy for HPV-positive HNSCC is discussed. Finally, the
possible mechanism for resistance to anti-EGFR target therapy is reviewed, and I 
discuss approaches to overcome the resistance with reference to an ongoing
clinical trial.

DOI: 10.1007/s10147-013-0660-4 
PMID: 24442754  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
