

2266. Oncotarget. 2016 Jun 28;7(26):40025-40037. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.9474.

Higher methylation intensity induced by EBV LMP1 via NF-κB/DNMT3b signaling
contributes to silencing of PTEN gene.

Peng H(1)(2), Chen Y(1), Gong P(1)(2), Cai L(1), Lyu X(1), Jiang Q(1), Wang J(1),
Lu J(1), Yao K(1), Liu K(3), Li J(1)(3), Li X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology at Nanfang Hospital, Cancer Research
Institute, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, The Second People's
Hospital of Guangdong Province, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515,
China.
(3)Department of Pathology, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical
University, Qingyuan 511518, China.

Phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) is a major tumor suppressor and usually
silenced via the deletion, insertion and mutation. We previously discovered its
inactivation via aberrant CpG island methylation. Here, we provide further
evidence that EBV latent membrane protein 1(LMP1) can induce a higher intensity
of DNA methylation at PTEN CpG islands, inactivating PTEN at the cellular and
molecular level. Initially, increased methylation intensity of PTEN CpG islands
was observed in EBV-infected nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) cells, accompanied by
decreased PTEN expression. In NPC tissue samples showing the methylation at PTEN 
promoter, LMP1 was highly expressed in higher methylation intensity group
relative to lower intensity group, and DNA methyltransferase 3b (DNMT3b)
expression was positively correlated with LMP1 expression. Moreover, transfection
of LMP1 gene into EBV-negative NPC cells demonstrated that LMP1 up-regulated
DNMT3b expression, leading to a higher intensity of PTEN CpG island methylation. 
Mechanistically, computational prediction and luciferase reporter assay
identified a functional NF-κB binding site on DNMT3b promoter and the mutated
NF-κB binding site abolished LMP1-mediated DNMT3b activation. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation displayed that NF-κB p65 subunit constitutively bound to
DNMT3b promoter, supporting the activation of DNMT3b by EBV LMP1 via NF-κB
signaling. Furthermore, the expression level of DNMT3b was observed to be
increased in the nuclei of LMP1-expressing NPC cells, and a NF-κB inhibitor,
PDTC, counteracted LMP1-mediated DNMT3b overexpression. Thus, this study first
reports that LMP1-mediated NF-κB can up-regulate DNMT3b transcription, thereby
leading to relatively higher methylation intensity at PTEN CpG islands, and
ultimately silencing major tumor suppressor PTEN.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.9474 
PMCID: PMC5129989
PMID: 27223069  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
