

2268. Papillomavirus Res. 2017 Dec;4:26-34. doi: 10.1016/j.pvr.2017.06.005. Epub 2017
Jun 16.

miRNA-expression in tonsillar squamous cell carcinomas in relation to HPV
infection and expression of the antileukoproteinase SLPI.

Quabius ES(1), Merz I(2), Görögh T(2), Hedderich J(3), Haag J(4), Röcken C(4),
Ambrosch P(2), Hoffmann M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery,
Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, Germany; Institute of Immunology,
Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, Germany. Electronic address:
ElgarSusanne.Quabius@uksh.de.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery,
Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, Germany.
(3)Institute for Medical Informatics and Statistics,
Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, Germany.
(4)Institute for Pathology, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, Germany.

The aim of this study was to determine if micro-(mi-)RNAs are involved in the
previously reported inverse correlation between the antileukoproteinase SLPI,
HPV, and smoking habit of head and neck squamous cells carcinoma (HNSCC)
patients. HPV-status and SLPI-protein expression were determined in tonsillar SCC
(TSCC; n=126). Differentially expressed miRNAs dependent on HPV-status and
SLPI-expression were detected by microarray; possible binding-sites in SLPI- and 
HPVE6-mRNAs were determined in silico. Survival rates were estimated testing
prognostic values of HPV-status, SLPI- and miRNA-expression. miRNA-array
identified 24 up-regulated and 10 down-regulated miRNAs in HPV-positive versus
HPV-negative TSCC (p<0.01; HPV-positivity: 42.1%). HPV-positivity resulted in two
up-regulated miRNAs in SLPI-positive TSCC. Of 16 further miRNAs, eight miRNAs
were up- and eight were down-regulated in SLPI-negative TSCC. RT-q-PCR-validation
of the four most differentially expressed miRNAs showed that miR-363 is expressed
strongest in SLPI-negative/HPV-positive TSSC. In silico-analysis of all
differentially expressed miRNAs identified miR-363, miR-210, miR-130a, and
miR-181a with possible binding sites in the HPV16-E6-mRNA, but none were
predicted in the SLPI-mRNA. HPV-positivity, low SLPI-levels and high
miR-363-levels are significantly associated with better survival rates. The data 
presented here show that miR-363 is associated with HPV-positive/SPLI-negative
TSCC. The prognostic value of miR-363 suggests a role in the assumed inverse
correlation of smoking and SPLI-expression in the mode of HPV-infections in
tonsillar but possibly also other HNSCC.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pvr.2017.06.005 
PMCID: PMC5883217
PMID: 29179866  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
