

2273. Mod Pathol. 2017 Sep;30(9):1194-1203. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2017.31. Epub 2017
Jun 16.

p16 immunohistochemistry in oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma: a comparison
of antibody clones using patient outcomes and high-risk human papillomavirus RNA 
status.

Shelton J(1), Purgina BM(2), Cipriani NA(3), Dupont WD(4), Plummer D(4), Lewis JS
Jr(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
(4)Department of Biostatistics and Preventive Medicine, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, USA.
(5)Department of Otolaryngology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
TN, USA.

High-risk human papillomavirus (HPV)-related oropharyngeal squamous cell
carcinomas have a more favorable prognosis than HPV-negative ones. p16
immunohistochemistry has been recommended as a prognostic test in clinical
practice. Several p16 antibodies are available, and their performance has not
been directly compared. We evaluated three commercially available p16 antibody
clones (E6H4, JC8 and G175-405) utilizing 199 cases of oropharyngeal squamous
cell carcinoma from a tissue microarray, read by three pathologists with three
different cutoffs for positivity: any staining, >50% and >75%. Positive
predictive values for high-risk HPV status by RNA in situ hybridization for the
E6H4, JC8 and G175-405 clones were 98%, 100% and 99% at the 75% cutoff, but
negative predictive values were much more variable at 86%, 69% and 56%,
respectively. These improved using the 50% cutoff, becoming similar for all three
antibodies. Intensity varied substantially, with 85% of E6H4, 72% of JC8 and 67% 
of G175-405 showing strong (3+) intensity. With Kaplan-Meier survival plots at
the 75% cutoff, the E6H4 clone showed the largest differential in disease
specific and overall survival between p16-positive and -negative results.
Decreasing the cutoff to 50% increased correlation with HPV in situ hybridization
and improved the survival differential for the JC8 and G175-405 clones without
worsening of performance for the E6H4 clone. Interobserver agreement was also
assessed by kappa scores and was highest for the E6H4 clone. Overall, these study
results show modest but important performance differences between the three
different p16 antibody clones, suggesting that the E6H4 clone performs best
because of strongest staining intensity, greatest differential in outcomes
between positive and negative results, lowest interobserver variability, and
lowest background, nonspecific staining. The results also suggest that a 75%
cutoff is very functional but that, in this patient population with high HPV
incidence, 50% and any staining cutoffs may be more effective, particularly for
the non-E6H4 clones.

DOI: 10.1038/modpathol.2017.31 
PMID: 28621317  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
