

2285. Laryngoscope. 2018 Aug;128(8):1867-1873. doi: 10.1002/lary.27038. Epub 2017 Dec
15.

The diagnostic pathway of oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma in a large U.S.
healthcare system.

Gilde J(1), Song B(1), Masroor F(1), Darbinian JA(1), Ritterman Weintraub ML(1), 
Salazar J(1), Yang E(1), Gurushanthaiah D(1), Wang KH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Kaiser Permanente Oakland 
Medical Center, Oakland, California, U.S.A.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the current diagnostic pathway of oropharyngeal squamous
cell carcinoma (OPSCC) and identify factors associated with time to diagnosis.
METHODS: Retrospective cohort study of patients with OPSCC in an integrated
healthcare system from January 1, 2013, to December 31, 2013. Patient
demographics, tobacco and alcohol use, chief complaint, tumor stage, human
papilloma virus (HPV) status, physician factors (diagnosis, antibiotic
prescription, performance of endoscopic exam, biopsy), and time intervals were
examined. Time variations by patient characteristics and physician practice were 
assessed.
RESULTS: We identified 152 patients with OPSCC. Of those, 90% had stage III to IV
disease. The cohort was largely male (85%), white (79%), with HPV-positive tumors
(84%). Most common chief complaints were neck mass (52%) and sore throat (20%).
Among those with neck a mass, 94% had HPV-positive tumors. Prescription of
antibiotics was associated with longer time to first otolaryngology evaluation.
Median time from symptom onset to first primary care physician (PCP) contact was 
3.0 weeks; from PCP to otolaryngologist was 1.1 weeks, and from otolaryngologist 
to tissue diagnosis was 0.4 weeks. At the first otolaryngology visit, 82%
underwent in-office flexible endoscopy and 58% had same-day biopsy, resulting in 
rapid time to tissue diagnosis. Diagnostic time intervals did not differ by HPV
status.
CONCLUSION: The overall diagnostic process was efficient, although initial
antibiotic treatment resulted in longer time to first otolaryngology visit. Tumor
HPV status was associated with presenting findings but not time to diagnosis. The
variation in diagnostic delay time and impact on survival outcomes is unknown and
merits further investigation.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 4. Laryngoscope, 1867-1873, 2018.

Â© 2017 The American Laryngological, Rhinological and Otological Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.27038 
PMID: 29243258  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
