

2286. Science. 2011 Aug 26;333(6046):1154-7. doi: 10.1126/science.1206923. Epub 2011
Jul 28.

Exome sequencing of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma reveals inactivating
mutations in NOTCH1.

Agrawal N(1), Frederick MJ, Pickering CR, Bettegowda C, Chang K, Li RJ, Fakhry C,
Xie TX, Zhang J, Wang J, Zhang N, El-Naggar AK, Jasser SA, Weinstein JN, Trevi√±o 
L, Drummond JA, Muzny DM, Wu Y, Wood LD, Hruban RH, Westra WH, Koch WM, Califano 
JA, Gibbs RA, Sidransky D, Vogelstein B, Velculescu VE, Papadopoulos N, Wheeler
DA, Kinzler KW, Myers JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, 600 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.
nagrawal@jhmi.edu

Comment in
    Science. 2011 Aug 26;333(6046):1102-3.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most common cancer
worldwide. To explore the genetic origins of this cancer, we used whole-exome
sequencing and gene copy number analyses to study 32 primary tumors. Tumors from 
patients with a history of tobacco use had more mutations than did tumors from
patients who did not use tobacco, and tumors that were negative for human
papillomavirus (HPV) had more mutations than did HPV-positive tumors. Six of the 
genes that were mutated in multiple tumors were assessed in up to 88 additional
HNSCCs. In addition to previously described mutations in TP53, CDKN2A, PIK3CA,
and HRAS, we identified mutations in FBXW7 and NOTCH1. Nearly 40% of the 28
mutations identified in NOTCH1 were predicted to truncate the gene product,
suggesting that NOTCH1 may function as a tumor suppressor gene rather than an
oncogene in this tumor type.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1206923 
PMCID: PMC3162986
PMID: 21798897  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
