

2287. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2010 Apr;49(4):319-26. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20742.

HPV status-independent association of alcohol and tobacco exposure or prior
radiation therapy with promoter methylation of FUSSEL18, EBF3, IRX1, and SEPT9,
but not SLC5A8, in head and neck squamous cell carcinomas.

Bennett KL(1), Lee W, Lamarre E, Zhang X, Seth R, Scharpf J, Hunt J, Eng C.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Medicine Institute Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is an aggressive malignancy with
more than half a million people being diagnosed with the disease annually. Within
the last 2 decades, the human papillomavirus (HPV) has been found to be
associated with this malignancy. More recently, HPV-infected HNSCC has been found
to exhibit higher levels of global DNA methylation. In a recent study, we
identified five tumor suppressive genes (IRX1, EBF3, SLC5A8, SEPT9, and FUSSEL18)
as frequently methylated in HNSCC biopsies using a global methylation analysis
via restriction landmark genomic scanning. In this study, we verify these genes
as valid methylation markers in two separate sets of HNSCC specimens. By using
the available clinical information linked to the patient specimens, we found a
strong association between promoter methylation of FUSSEL18, IRX1, and EBF3 and
prior radiation therapy (P < 0.0001) irrespective of HPV status. Also, promoter
methylation of FUSSEL18 and SEPTIN9 was found to correlate significantly with
exposure to alcohol and tobacco (P = 0.021). Importantly, in this study, we
preliminarily show a trend between HPV16 positivity and specific target gene
hypermethylation of IRX1, EBF3, SLC5A8, and SEPT9. If replicated in a larger
study, the HPV status may be a patient selection biomarker when determining the
most efficacious treatment modality for these different subsets of patients
(e.g., inclusion or exclusion of epigenetic therapies). Equally notable and
independent of HPV status, hypermethylation of the promoters of a subset of these
genes in recurrences especially in the setting of prior radiation or in the
setting of alcohol and tobacco use might help guide adjunctive inclusion or
exclusion or epigenetic therapy.

DOI: 10.1002/gcc.20742 
PMID: 20029986  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
