

2290. J Mol Diagn. 2011 Jul;13(4):377-81. doi: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2011.03.007. Epub 2011 
May 14.

Efficient DNA extraction for HPV genotyping in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded 
tissues.

Steinau M(1), Patel SS, Unger ER.

Author information: 
(1)Chronic Viral Diseases Branch, Division of High-Consequence Pathogens and
Pathology, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia 30333, USA. MSteinau@cdc.gov

DNA from archived FFPE can be used for papillomavirus genotyping, but potential
problems include paraffin as a physical barrier, DNA cross-linking, and PCR
inhibitors. To address these complications, we combined a commercially available 
DNA isolation kit (Qiagen DNeasy) with a heat treatment and evaluated the
resulting DNA with regards to HPV typing. DNA was extracted from 10-μm sections
from 150 FFPE cancer samples. One protocol followed the manufacturer's
recommendation, including paraffin removal by xylene and tissue lysis at 56°C. A 
second section was directly incubated at 120°C and subsequently lysed at 65°C.
After spin-column purification, both extracts were tested with a linear array HPV
genotyping assay. Additionally, cellular DNA yield, HPV16 DNA copies, and PCR
inhibitors were assessed by real-time qPCR assays. Inadequate linear array HPV
genotyping assay results were significantly more frequent (P = 0.0003) in
xylene-treated (29/150, 19.3%) than in heat-treated extracts (8/150, 5.3%). HPV
detection also differed, with 94/150 (62.7%) and 110/150 (73.3%) positive
results, respectively (P = 0.0026). The heat method also yielded more
PCR-amplifiable cellular DNA (8.2-fold; P < 0.001) and HPV16 copies (6.5-fold; P 
= 0.009), although PCR inhibitors also had a greater effect (P = 0.035).
Aggressive heat treatment demonstrated an advantage over traditional xylene
purification protocols, resulting in higher DNA yields and increased sensitivity 
for HPV testing.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2011.03.007 
PMCID: PMC3123789
PMID: 21704270  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
