

2294. Int J Cancer. 2013 Jul;133(1):120-9. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28015. Epub 2013 Feb 12.

Radiation-induced loss of cell surface CD47 enhances immune-mediated clearance of
human papillomavirus-positive cancer.

Vermeer DW(1), Spanos WC, Vermeer PD, Bruns AM, Lee KM, Lee JH.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Research Center, Sanford Research/University of South Dakota,
Sioux Falls, SD 57104, USA.

The increasing incidence of human papillomavirus (HPV) related oropharyngeal
squamous cell carcinoma (OSSC) demands development of novel therapies. Despite
presenting at a more advanced stage, HPV(+) oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma
(OSCC) have a better prognosis than their HPV(-) counterparts. We have previously
demonstrated that clearance of HPV(+) OSCC during treatment with radiation and
chemotherapy requires an immune response which is likely responsible for the
improved clinical outcomes. To further elucidate the mechanism of immune-mediated
clearance, we asked whether radiation therapy induces tumor cell changes that
allow the body to recognize and aid in tumor clearance. Here, we describe a
radiation-induced change in tumor surface protein expression that is critical for
immune-mediated clearance. Radiation therapy decreases surface expression of
CD47, a self-marker. CD47 is frequently overexpressed in head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma and radiation induces a decrease of CD47 in a dose-dependent
manner. We show that both in vitro and in vivo tumor cell CD47 protein levels are
restored over time after sublethal radiation exposure and that protein levels on 
adjacent, normal tissues remain unaffected. Furthermore, reduction of tumor cell 
CD47 increases phagocytosis of these cells by dendritic cells and leads to
increased interferon gamma and granzyme production from mixed lymphocytes.
Finally, decreasing tumor cell CD47 in combination with standard radiation and
chemotherapy results in improved immune-mediated tumor clearance in vivo. These
findings help define an important mechanism of radiation-related immune clearance
and suggest that decreasing CD47 specifically on tumor cells may be a good
therapeutic target for HPV related disease.

Copyright Â© 2013 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.28015 
PMCID: PMC3972896
PMID: 23292955  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
