

2300. Oral Oncol. 2014 Nov;50(11):1035-40. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2014.08.013.
Epub 2014 Sep 13.

Use of next generation sequencing in head and neck squamous cell carcinomas: a
review.

Tabatabaeifar S(1), Kruse TA(2), Thomassen M(2), Larsen MJ(2), Sørensen JA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic Surgery, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark;
Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark;
University of Southern Denmark, Institute of Clinical Research, Odense, Denmark.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark; 
University of Southern Denmark, Institute of Clinical Research, Odense, Denmark.
(3)Department of Plastic Surgery, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark;
University of Southern Denmark, Institute of Clinical Research, Odense, Denmark. 
Electronic address: jens.ahm@dadlnet.dk.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) can primarily be attributed to
alcohol consumption, tobacco use and infection with human papilloma virus. The
heterogeneous nature of HNSCC has exposed a lack of tools for clinicians to
provide more accurate prognosis. There is a need for biomarkers that can
characterise the diversity of the cancer, and perhaps in the future, some of
these biomarkers can point to targets for use in targeted and personalised
medicine. The introduction of next generation sequencing (NGS) has allowed
researches to sequence thousands of genes at a time through fast and relatively
inexpensive whole exome and genome sequencing. The challenge with these enormous 
amounts of data is to extract relevant clinical information. In this review, we
systematically evaluate all the published literature on the use of NGS of genomic
DNA in HNSCC.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2014.08.013 
PMID: 25223596  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
