

2301. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2010 Dec;3(12):1534-41. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-10-0086. Epub 2010 Oct 6.

A mouse model for human anal cancer.

Stelzer MK(1), Pitot HC, Liem A, Schweizer J, Mahoney C, Lambert PF.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53705, USA.

Human anal cancers are associated with high-risk human papillomaviruses (HPV)
that cause other anogenital cancers and head and neck cancers. As with other
cancers, HPV16 is the most common high-risk HPV in anal cancers. We describe the 
generation and characterization of a mouse model for human anal cancer. This
model makes use of K14E6 and K14E7 transgenic mice in which the HPV16 E6 and E7
genes are directed in their expression to stratified squamous epithelia. HPV16 E6
and E7 possess oncogenic properties including, but not limited to, their capacity
to inactivate the cellular tumor suppressors p53 and pRb, respectively. Both E6
and E7 were found to be functionally expressed in the anal epithelia of
K14E6/K14E7 transgenic mice. To assess the susceptibility of these mice to anal
cancer, mice were treated topically with dimethylbenz[a]anthracene (DMBA), a
chemical carcinogen that is known to induce squamous cell carcinomas in other
sites. Nearly 50% of DMBA-treated HPV16 E6/E7 transgenic mice showed overt signs 
of tumors, whereas none of the like-treated nontransgenic mice showed tumors.
Histopathologic analyses confirmed that the HPV16 transgenic mice were increased 
in their susceptibility to anal cancers and precancerous lesions. Biomarker
analyses demonstrated that these mouse anal cancers exhibit properties that are
similar to those observed in HPV-positive precursors to human anal cancer. This
is the first mouse model for investigating the contributions of viral and
cellular factors in anal carcinogenesis, and should provide a platform for
assessing new therapeutic modalities for treating and/or preventing this type of 
cancer.

Â©2010 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-10-0086 
PMCID: PMC3006089
PMID: 20947489  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
