

2303. J Neurol Sci. 2014 Jan 15;336(1-2):263-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2013.10.017. Epub
2013 Oct 16.

First adult case of Helicobacter cinaedi meningitis.

Sugiyama A(1), Mori M(2), Ishiwada N(3), Himuro K(1), Kuwabara S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba,
Japan.
(2)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba,
Japan. Electronic address: morim@faculty.chiba-u.jp.
(3)Division of Control and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, Chiba University,
Chiba, Japan.

Helicobacter cinaedi, a gram-negative spiral bacillus that inhabits the
intestinal tracts of rodents and primates, is associated with gastroenteritis in 
humans. H. cinaedi infection has been commonly reported in immunocompromised
individuals such as human immunodeficiency virus-infected patients, but rarely in
immunocompetent individuals. Prior contact with animals has attracted attention
as a possible source of H. cinaedi infection. We report a case of meningitis in
an immunocompetent 34-year-old woman who had daily contact with a kitten for a
month. She developed acute headaches, fevers, and chills. Neurological
examination revealed neck stiffness and her cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) exhibited
polymorphonuclear pleocytosis and a decreased concentration of glucose. Blood and
CSF cultures were negative; however, the pathogen responsible for her condition
was identified as H. cinaedi by polymerase chain reaction in CSF. This is the
first adult case of meningitis caused by H. cinaedi. Thus, this bacillus should
be considered a possible causative agent of bacterial meningitis in healthy
adults.

Â© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2013.10.017 
PMID: 24169225  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
