

2304. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2014 Jun;22(3):195-200. doi:
10.1097/MOO.0000000000000044.

Dysphagia in head and neck cancer: prevention and treatment.

Starmer HM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Swallowing difficulties are among the most problematic
outcomes associated with head and neck cancer (HNCA) and the strategies employed 
to treat it. With a rising incidence of human papilloma virus-associated HNCA, a 
larger number of patients are expected to survive their cancer, and therefore
will be more susceptible to long-term treatment toxicities. Optimization of
long-term swallowing outcomes is an important objective for those working with
patients with HNCA.
RECENT FINDINGS: The role of the swallowing therapist in the management of
patients with HNCA cannot be overstated. This begins with pretreatment evaluation
of swallowing. At the time of initial assessment, education should be provided
regarding treatment toxicities and the importance of prophylactic swallowing
exercises and oral intake. Recent evidence suggests that maintaining an oral diet
and engaging in swallowing exercise during radiation have a positive impact on
diet level, swallowing physiology, patient-perceived swallowing-related quality
of life, and reduced feeding tube use. Although treatment strategies such as
radiation de-intensification and transoral surgical treatments show promise for
reducing toxicities, evidence regarding their impact is still being amassed.
SUMMARY: Maintaining an oral diet and performing prophylactic swallowing
exercises are currently the most evidence-based strategies for dysphagia
prevention in HNCA.

DOI: 10.1097/MOO.0000000000000044 
PMID: 24614062  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
