

2307. Am J Surg Pathol. 2011 Dec;35(12):1806-11. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e318236a9b0.

Absence of Merkel cell polyomavirus in primary parotid high-grade neuroendocrine 
carcinomas regardless of cytokeratin 20 immunophenotype.

Chernock RD(1), Duncavage EJ, Gnepp DR, El-Mofty SK, Lewis JS Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA. rchernock@path.wustl.edu

High-grade neuroendocrine carcinoma of the salivary glands is a rare malignancy
that can be difficult to distinguish from metastatic neuroendocrine (Merkel cell)
carcinoma of the skin, which often occurs on the head and neck and may
metastasize to lymph nodes in or adjacent to salivary glands, particularly the
parotid gland. As the 2 tumors have morphologic and immunophenotypic overlap,
additional diagnostic tools may be clinically useful. Merkel cell carcinoma is
known to harbor Merkel cell polyomavirus in up to 80% of cases. However, the
presence or absence of this virus in salivary gland neuroendocrine carcinomas has
not been investigated. We evaluated 7 primary salivary gland high-grade
neuroendocrine carcinomas (all from the parotid) for the virus by both
immunohistochemistry (CM2B4 clone) and real-time polymerase chain reaction
directed against the conserved small T antigen. Five of the tumors had small cell
morphology, and 2 had large cell morphology. All were either chromogranin and/or 
synaptophysin positive. Four of the 5 small cell (80%) and 1 of the 2 large cell 
(50%) carcinomas were cytokeratin 20 positive. All but 1 case had cervical lymph 
node metastases at presentation. Merkel cell polyomavirus T antigen was not
detected in any of the 7 tumors, either by immunohistochemistry or by polymerase 
chain reaction with adequate controls. These observations suggest that primary
parotid high-grade neuroendocrine carcinoma arises from a biological pathway that
is different from that of cutaneous Merkel cell carcinomas. Furthermore, viral
testing may aid in distinguishing the 2 tumor types, as a positive result would
favor a metastasis.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e318236a9b0 
PMID: 22067330  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
