

2311. Cancer Lett. 2014 Jan 1;342(1):92-103. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.08.041. Epub
2013 Aug 31.

Establishment and characterization of a novel HPV-negative laryngeal squamous
cell carcinoma cell line, FD-LSC-1, with missense and nonsense mutations of TP53 
in the DNA-binding domain.

Wu CP(1), Zhou L, Gong HL, Du HD, Tian J, Sun S, Li JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Eye, Ear, Nose and Throat 
Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 200031, China.

Laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) is a common malignancy in China;
however, publically available LSCC cell lines are few and not established from
Chinese populations. Hence, novel and well-characterized LSCC cell lines of
Chinese origin are urgently needed to provide researchers with a comprehensive
database for LSCC research. From 40 cases of LSCC, we established a novel cell
line that was maintained for more than 100 passages in vitro and was found to
have typical epithelial morphology and ultrastructure. In-depth characterization 
analysis revealed polyploidy in DNA content; a doubling time of some 24h; high
tumorigenicity in immunodeficient mice; higher invasive potential and more
sensitive to radiation and cisplatin compared with HeLa cell line; upregulated
Ki67, Notch1, EGFR, and CK5 protein levels; negative infection of human
papillomavirus (HPV) and mycoplasma; expression of head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) biomarkers; mutations of TP53 in exons 5 and 8; a near-triploid
karyotype with complex structural aberrations; and dozens of dysregulated genes
and miRNAs. Cell authentication testing by the American Type Culture Collection
(ATCC) confirmed the human origin of this cell line. Our findings indicate that a
novel and well-differentiated LSCC cell line recapitulating the primary tumor's
malignant characteristics is established and well characterized. It does not
match any cell lines within the ATCC database and helps to elucidate the
molecular pathogenesis of LSCC.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.08.041 
PMID: 24001612  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
