

2313. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2016 Jan;54(1):60-70. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2015-0062OC.

Role of Aspergillus fumigatus in Triggering Protease-Activated Receptor-2 in
Airway Epithelial Cells and Skewing the Cells toward a T-helper 2 Bias.

Homma T(1)(2), Kato A(1), Bhushan B(3), Norton JE(1), Suh LA(1), Carter RG(1),
Gupta DS(4), Schleimer RP(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Medicine, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois.
(2)2 Division of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Showa University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)3 Division of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Ann & Robert H. Lurie
Children's Hospital of Chicago and the Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois; and.
(4)4 Department of Medicine, Michigan State University College of Human Medicine,
East Lansing, Michigan.

Aspergillus fumigatus (AF) infection and sensitization are common and promote Th2
disease in individuals with asthma. Innate immune responses of bronchial
epithelial cells are now known to play a key role in determination of T cell
responses upon encounter with inhaled pathogens. We have recently shown that
extracts of AF suppress JAK-STAT signaling in epithelial cells and thus may
promote Th2 bias. To elucidate the impact of AF on human bronchial epithelial
cells, we tested the hypothesis that AF can modulate the response of airway
epithelial cells to favor a Th2 response and explored the molecular mechanism of 
the effect. Primary normal human bronchial epithelial (NHBE) cells were treated
with AF extract or fractionated AF extract before stimulation with poly I:C or
infection with human rhinovirus serotype 16 (HRV16). Expression of CXCL10 mRNA
(real-time RT-PCR) and protein (ELISA) were measured as markers of IFN-mediated
epithelial Th1-biased responses. Western blot was performed to evaluate
expression of IFN regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3), NF-κB, and tyrosine-protein
phosphatase nonreceptor type 11 (PTPN11), which are other markers of Th1 skewing.
Knockdown experiments for protease-activated receptor-2 (PAR-2) and PTPN11 were
performed to analyze the role of PAR-2 in the mechanism of suppression by AF. AF 
and a high-molecular-weight fraction of AF extract (HMW-AF; > 50 kD) profoundly
suppressed poly I:C- and HRV16-induced expression of both CXCL10 mRNA and protein
from NHBE cells via a mechanism that relied upon PAR-2 activation. Both AF
extract and a specific PAR-2 activator (AC-55541) suppressed the poly I:C
activation of phospho-IRF-3 without affecting activation of NF-κB. Furthermore,
HMW-AF extract enhanced the expression of PTPN11, a phosphatase known to inhibit 
IFN signaling, and concurrently suppressed poly I:C-induced expression of both
CXCL10 mRNA and protein from NHBE cells. These results show that exposure of
bronchial epithelial cells to AF extract suppressed poly I:C and HRV16 signaling 
via a mechanism shown to involve activation of PAR-2 and PTPN11. This action of
AF may promote viral disease exacerbations and may skew epithelial cells to
promote Th2 inflammation in allergic airway disorders mediated or exacerbated by 
AF, such as asthma and chronic rhinosinusitis.

DOI: 10.1165/rcmb.2015-0062OC 
PMCID: PMC4742929
PMID: 26072921  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
