

2315. Hum Pathol. 2016 Apr;50:51-61. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2015.11.001. Epub 2015 Nov 
17.

Molecular subclassification determined by human papillomavirus and epidermal
growth factor receptor status is associated with the prognosis of oropharyngeal
squamous cell carcinoma.

Nakano T(1), Yamamoto H(2), Nakashima T(3), Nishijima T(1), Satoh M(1), Hatanaka 
Y(1), Shiratsuchi H(3), Yasumatsu R(3), Toh S(3), Komune S(3), Oda Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.
(2)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. Electronic address:
hidetaka@surgpath.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is an indicator of good response to
chemoradiotherapy in oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC), and epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a molecular-therapeutic target in head and neck 
squamous cell carcinoma. Here we investigated the prevalence and prognostic
significance of HPV infection and EGFR alteration in OPSCC. We analyzed the
presence of high-risk HPV using in situ hybridization, protein expressions of p16
and EGFR using immunohistochemistry, and the EGFR gene copy number gain using
chromogenic in situ hybridization (CISH) in 105 cases of OPSCC. The biopsy
specimens before chemoradiotherapy were used for these analyses. HPV infection
and p16 protein overexpression were detected in 53.3% and 52.4% of the OPSCCs,
and each factor was associated with better overall survival (P = .0026 and P =
.0026) and nonkeratinizing histology (P = .0002 and P = .0004), respectively.
EGFR gene copy number gain (high polysomy or amplification) was detected in 12.4%
of the OPSCCs and was correlated with EGFR protein overexpression (P = .0667) and
worse overall survival (P < .0001). HPV infection and EGFR gene copy number gain 
(EGFR CISH positive) were mutually exclusive. The HPV-negative/EGFR CISH-positive
OPSCCs had significantly worse overall survival than did the HPV-positive/EGFR
CISH-negative OPSCCs and HPV-negative/EGFR CISH-negative OPSCCs (P < .0001 and P 
< .0001, respectively). The EGFR CISH-negative OPSCCs had favorable prognosis
irrespective of HPV infection. Our results suggest that EGFR gene copy number
gain-positive tumors represent an HPV-negative, aggressive subgroup of OPSCCs.
The molecular subclassification of OPSCCs based on HPV infection and EGFR status 
may serve as important information for appropriate therapeutic strategy.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2015.11.001 
PMID: 26997438  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
