

2319. J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2011 Jun 1;9(6):653-62.

Controversies in the locoregional management of head and neck cancer.

Brizel DM(1), Lydiatt W, Colevas AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Duke Cancer Institute, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA. david.brizel@duke.edu

Head and neck cancer (HNC) is a heterogeneous combination of various sites and
types of disease. This manuscript elaborates on 3 important and current issues:
the emerging role of human papilloma virus (HPV) in oropharyngeal cancer (OPC),
current considerations in systemic therapy for advanced disease, and evolving
treatment of the neck. Exogenous carcinogens, most notably tobacco, have
classically been implicated in the development of HNC. A large increase in the
incidence of OPC has occurred in the past few decades, predominantly in
nontobacco users, and is caused by HPV. This disease is unique in many respects
and presents an opportunity for novel therapeutic approaches. Because the
prognosis for HPV-related HNC is better, regardless of whether surgery or
radiation is used as the primary therapy, the reduction of treatment-related
morbidity has assumed increasing importance and provides unique opportunities and
challenges for de-escalation of therapies. Radiotherapy (RT) and concurrent
cisplatin is the most commonly used nonsurgical platform for locally advanced
disease. New data suggest that viable alternatives exist to the typical 3 cycles 
of bolus high-dose cisplatin. The role of RT and concurrent taxanes remains less 
understood. Similarly, the value of integrating epidermal growth factor
inhibition and concurrent chemoradiation is under continuing investigation. The
use of PET scanning is changing the traditional use of adjuvant neck dissection
after RT or chemoradiation. Recent data support the use of surgery in the
presence of a positive posttreatment PET, and observation in the setting of a
negative posttreatment scan.


PMID: 21636537  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
