

232. Int J Cancer. 2016 Nov 1;139(9):2001-11. doi: 10.1002/ijc.30243. Epub 2016 Jul
15.

Genomic characterization of viral integration sites in HPV-related cancers.

Bodelon C(1), Untereiner ME(1), Machiela MJ(1), Vinokurova S(2), Wentzensen N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, MD.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Biology of Viruses, NN Blokhin Russian Cancer Research
Center, Moscow, Russia.

Persistent infection with carcinogenic human papillomaviruses (HPV) causes the
majority of anogenital cancers and a subset of head and neck cancers. The HPV
genome is frequently found integrated into the host genome of invasive cancers.
The mechanisms of how it may promote disease progression are not well understood.
Thoroughly characterizing integration events can provide insights into HPV
carcinogenesis. Individual studies have reported limited number of integration
sites in cell lines and human samples. We performed a systematic review of
published integration sites in HPV-related cancers and conducted a pooled
analysis to formally test for integration hotspots and genomic features enriched 
in integration events using data from the Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE). 
Over 1,500 integration sites were reported in the literature, of which 90.8%
(N = 1,407) were in human tissues. We found 10 cytobands enriched for integration
events, three previously reported ones (3q28, 8q24.21 and 13q22.1) and seven
additional ones (2q22.3, 3p14.2, 8q24.22, 14q24.1, 17p11.1, 17q23.1 and 17q23.2).
Cervical infections with HPV18 were more likely to have breakpoints in 8q24.21
(p = 7.68 × 10(-4) ) than those with HPV16. Overall, integration sites were more 
likely to be in gene regions than expected by chance (p = 6.93 × 10(-9) ). They
were also significantly closer to CpG regions, fragile sites, transcriptionally
active regions and enhancers. Few integration events occurred within 50 Kb of
known cervical cancer driver genes. This suggests that HPV integrates in
accessible regions of the genome, preferentially genes and enhancers, which may
affect the expression of target genes.

© 2016 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.30243 
PMID: 27343048  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
