

2320. Int J Clin Oncol. 2009 Jun;14(3):181-90. doi: 10.1007/s10147-009-0882-7. Epub
2009 Jul 11.

Nasal natural killer (NK)/T-cell lymphoma: clinical, histological, virological,
and genetic features.

Harabuchi Y(1), Takahara M, Kishibe K, Moriai S, Nagato T, Ishii H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Asahikawa Medical College,
2-1-1-1 Midorigaoka-Higashi, Asahikawa, 078-8510, Japan.
hyasu@asahikawa-med.ac.jp

Nasal natural killer (NK)/T-cell lymphoma (NNKTL) is a clinical illness
characterized by progressive unrelenting ulceration and necrosis of the nasal
cavity and midline facial tissues. Histological features of the lymphoma include 
angiocentric and polymorphous lymphoreticular infiltrates, called polymorphic
reticulosis. Surface antigens and the NK-cell marker, CD56, as well as pan-T
antigen CD2, cytoplasmic CD3 (CD3epsilon), and CD45 are expressed in the lymphoma
cells. The origin of the lymphoma is thought to be either NK-cell linkage without
T-cell receptor (TCR) rearrangement or gammadeltaT-cell linkage with
gammadeltaTCR rearrangement. Since the authors of this study first demonstrated
the presence of Epstein Barr virus (EBV)-DNA and EBV oncogenic proteins in NNKTL,
the lymphoma has been classified as one of the EBV-associated malignancies. The
NNKTL cells produce interleukin (IL)-9, IL-10, and interferon-gamma-inducible
protein-10 (IP-10), possibly due to EBV-oncogenic proteins in the lymphoma cells,
and such cytokines take an important part in the cell proliferation and invasion,
acting in an autocrine manner. Clinically, the serum EBV-DNA copy number is
useful as a specific tumor marker and a predictive prognostic factor. Even in
early clinical stages, the lymphoma shows poor prognosis caused by the rapid
progression of the lesion into distinct organs. Our newly designed arterial
infusion chemotherapy, from the superficial temporal artery, in combination with 
radiotherapy, has shown a favorable outcome in patients with NNKTL. In this
article, the clinical, pathological, and virological characteristics of the
lymphoma are reviewed, along with a report of our investigations.

DOI: 10.1007/s10147-009-0882-7 
PMID: 19593607  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
