

2321. J Clin Oncol. 2015 Oct 10;33(29):3328-37. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2015.61.0063. Epub
2015 Sep 8.

Management of Squamous Cancer Metastatic to Cervical Nodes With an Unknown
Primary Site.

Galloway TJ(1), Ridge JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)All authors: Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA.
(2)All authors: Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA. drew.ridge@fccc.edu.

Squamous cell carcinoma of an unknown primary (SCCUP) of the head and neck is a
rare disease. As a diagnosis of exclusion, the manner in which it is assigned
merits consideration. Despite the development and refinement of several
techniques designed to locate an occult tumor, including cross-sectional anatomic
imaging, functional imaging, and transoral surgical techniques, delineating SCCUP
remains an active clinical problem. Its relative rarity has prevented prospective
study of the entity. Hence, investigators must rely on retrospective analyses to 
understand the disease and its appropriate treatment. The current understanding
of SCCUP differs substantially from when it was initially described decades ago. 
The most common site of a small primary tumor initially thought to represent
SCCUP is the tonsil or base of the tongue, and an increasing percentage are
associated with human papilloma virus. Modern treatment of SCCUP by neck
dissection alone, neck dissection followed by radiation with or without
concurrent chemotherapy, or primary chemoradiation according to initial nodal
disease burden produces extraordinarily low recurrence rates. Whether the
potential mucosal primary site and/or the contralateral neck should be electively
treated is controversial. Efficacy data seem to be similar; therefore, an
evaluation of the toxicity of both treatment paradigms is warranted.

Â© 2015 by American Society of Clinical Oncology.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2015.61.0063 
PMID: 26351351  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
