

2322. Pol Merkur Lekarski. 2015 Aug;39(230):116-21.

[Oncolytic viruses as a new way of treatment of neoplastic diseases].

[Article in Polish]

Kukla U(1), Chronowska J(1), Łabuzek K(1), Okopień B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University 
of Silesia, Katowice, Poland.

Despite the unceasing progression in chemotherapy, radiotherapy and surgery,
neoplasms are still the second, after cardiovascular diseases, cause of death in 
the world. The creation of oncolytic viruses gives hope for increase of
anticancer therapy effectiveness. Oncolytic viruses are the type of viruses that 
selectively infect and cause the lyse of tumor cells excluding normal cells. This
mechanism allows to avoid the consequences of the possible replication of the
virus, which having entered to the organism, replicates in organism's cells by
using the DNA of host cells. The development of genetic engineering and molecular
biology has enabled the creation of this kind of genetically modified viruses,
which deprive them of their virulence. Currently, there are many clinical trials 
in progress including the use of oncolytic viruses in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma, thyroid cancer, colorectal cancer, liver cancer, melanoma and
glioblastoma multiforme treatment. There are parallel studies in animals using
the subsequent viruses. Oncolytic viruses treatment is generally well tolerated, 
without significant side effects. It is worth to point out that this method
combined with chemotherapy and radiotherapy allows to reduce the use of
therapeutic doses, which significantly reduces the toxicity of conventional
treatment. Further clinical studies evaluating the efficacy and safety of
oncolytic viruses will develop more effective and better tolerated therapeutic
protocols in the future.

© 2015 MEDPRESS.


PMID: 26319388  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
