

2329. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2015 Jul;272(7):1749-54. doi:
10.1007/s00405-014-3105-4. Epub 2014 Jun 1.

Expression of podoplanin and prognosis in oropharyngeal cancer.

Preuss SF(1), Anagiotos A, Seuthe IM, Drebber U, Wedemeyer I, Kreppel M, Semrau
R, Eslick GD, Klussmann JP, Huebbers CU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University of
Cologne, Medical Faculty, Cologne, Germany, simon.preuss@uni-koeln.de.

It has been shown that podoplanin expression is associated with carcinoma of the 
aerodigestive tract. Recent studies indicate that podoplanin may serve as a
prognostic biomarker in oral carcinoma. In order to provide evidence on the role 
of podoplanin in oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma, we evaluated the
prognostic impact of podoplanin in these patients. We analyzed formalin-fixed
tissue samples from 107 consecutive patients with oropharyngeal squamous cell
carcinoma. HPV typing and immunohistochemical staining for both p16 and
podoplanin were performed. Expression of podoplanin was seen in 38.3% of all
cases. We found no correlation of the podoplanin scores with either p16
expression or with HPV status. There was no significant correlation of podoplanin
expression with the staging variables T, N, M, and tumor grading. Podoplanin
expression did neither influence the 5-year overall survival nor the 5-year
disease-free survival. Concluding, we could not find a prognostic role of
podoplanin expression neither in the HPV-positive cases nor in the HPV-negative
cases. It appears that podoplanin is not expressed as often in oropharyngeal
cancer compared to oral cancer. We could not show any relation of lymph node
metastases and podoplanin expression in this homogenous cohort of tumors.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-014-3105-4 
PMID: 24880471  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
