

233. Exp Mol Pathol. 2017 Feb;102(1):47-49. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2016.12.004. Epub
2016 Dec 7.

Utility of the Roche Cobas 4800 for detection of high-risk human papillomavirus
in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma.

Pettus JR(1), Wilson TL(1), Steinmetz HB(1), Lefferts JA(1), Tafe LJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical
Center, Lebanon, NH, United States.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical
Center, Lebanon, NH, United States. Electronic address:
Laura.J.Tafe@Hitchcock.org.

Clinical laboratories are expected to reliably identify human papilloma virus
(HPV) associated oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) for prognostic and
potential therapeutic applications. In addition to surrogate p16
immunohistochemistry (IHC) testing, DNA-based HPV-specific testing strategies are
widely utilized. Recognizing the efficiency of the Roche Cobas 4800 platform for 
testing gynecological cytology specimens for high-risk HPV, we elected to
evaluate the potential utility of this platform for testing formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) OPSCC tissue. Using the Roche Linear Array assay for
comparison, we tested twenty-eight samples (16 primary OPSCC, 2 lymph node
metastases from primary OPSCC, 1 oral tongue carcinoma, 3 benign squamous
papillomas, and 3 non-oropharyngeal carcinoma tissues). Excluding two invalid
results, the Roche Cobas 4800 testing resulted in excellent inter-assay
concordance (25/26, 96.2%) and 100% concordance for HPV-16/HPV-18 positive
samples. This data suggests that the Roche Cobas 4800 platform may be a
cost-effective method for testing OPSCC FFPE tissues in a clinical molecular
pathology laboratory setting.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2016.12.004 
PMID: 27939577  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
