

2330. Oral Oncol. 2016 Nov;62:60-71. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2016.10.003. Epub 2016
Oct 18.

Extracapsular spread in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma: A systematic
review and meta-analysis.

Mermod M(1), Tolstonog G(1), Simon C(1), Monnier Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head & Neck Surgery, Head & Neck Tumor
Laboratory, CHUV, University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, Head & Neck Surgery, Head & Neck Tumor
Laboratory, CHUV, University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland. Electronic address:
yan.monnier@chuv.ch.

Comment in
    Oral Oncol. 2017 Mar;66:e1-e2.

Extracapsular spread (ECS) is one of the most important prognostic factors in
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). However, despite its major
clinical relevance, there are still a number of important remaining issues
regarding this condition. Indeed, standardized diagnostic and grading criteria of
ECS are still lacking. The imaging modality of choice for its diagnosis is a
matter of debate. Current research looking at the identification of specific
biomarkers is ongoing. Recent findings demonstrate a direct correlation between
the level of extension of ECS and a poor prognosis. Accumulating data show that
ECS does not carry the same adverse features in human papilloma virus
(HPV)-positive oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC). New treatment
strategies based on these factors are currently considered to investigate the
possibility of diminishing the toxicity of chemo-radiotherapy while maintaining
similar outcomes. The goal of this article was to provide a systematic review of 
the literature covering all the issues related to ECS. As an additional component
of the review, meta-analyses were performed on relevant aspects of ECS for which 
previous quantitative data were outdated or not available. The results of these
meta-analyses confirm the negative impact of ECS on loco-regional recurrence and 
distant metastasis. They also demonstrate the absence of a negative impact of ECS
in HPV-positive OPSCC.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2016.10.003 
PMID: 27865373  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
