

2334. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2013 Dec;62(12):1821-30. doi:
10.1007/s00262-013-1488-5. Epub 2013 Oct 22.

Decreased HPV-specific T cell responses and accumulation of immunosuppressive
influences in oropharyngeal cancer patients following radical therapy.

Al-Taei S(1), Banner R, Powell N, Evans M, Palaniappan N, Tabi Z, Man S.

Author information: 
(1)Velindre Cancer Centre, Cardiff, UK.

Oropharyngeal cancer (OPC) is a type of squamous cell head and neck cancer that
is often associated with human papillomavirus (HPV) infection, suggesting the
potential for immunotherapeutic targeting of HPV antigens. This study aimed to
determine the effect of radical therapy on HPV-specific T cells and other immune 
parameters in 20 OPC patients, as a prelude to future immunotherapy studies. HPV 
DNA could be detected in 9/12 available tissue samples (8/9 HPV(+) samples were
also p16(+)). HPV-specific T cell responses against HPV16 E6 and E7 peptides were
detected by enzyme-linked immunoSPOT in 10/13 and 8/13 evaluable patients,
respectively, but did not appear to correlate with HPV status. Post-treatment,
both HPV E6 and E7 T cell responses were decreased (4/13 and 2/13 patients,
respectively). These reductions in T cell response could not be explained by a
concurrent decrease in memory T cells whose absolute numbers were relatively
unaffected by radical therapy (27,975 vs. 25,661/10(5) PBMC) despite a
significant decrease in overall lymphocyte counts (1.74 vs. 0.69 Ã— 10(9)/L).
Instead, there were significant increases in regulatory T cells (3.7 vs. 6.8 %)
and a population of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (CD14(-)HLA-DR(-)CD15(hi),
12.38 vs. 21.92 %). This suggests that immunosuppression may contribute to the
reduction in HPV-specific T cell responses post-treatment, although study of
larger patient cohorts will be required to test whether this affects clinical
outcome. Overall these findings suggest that HPV-targeted immunotherapy in
post-therapy OPC patients will require multiple strategies to boost T cell
immunity and to overcome the influence of immunosuppressive cells.

DOI: 10.1007/s00262-013-1488-5 
PMID: 24146146  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
