

2341. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2017 Oct;274(10):3735-3739. doi:
10.1007/s00405-017-4672-y. Epub 2017 Jul 12.

Head and neck diffuse large B cell lymphomas (HN-DLBCL) in human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) positive patients: long-term results in the highly active
antiretroviral therapy (HAART) era.

De Felice F(1), Di Mino A(2), Grapulin L(2), Mistrulli ML(2), Musio D(2),
Tombolini V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiotherapy, Policlinico Umberto I, "Sapienza" University of
Rome, Viale Regina Elena 326, 00161, Rome, Italy. fradefelice@hotmail.it.
(2)Department of Radiotherapy, Policlinico Umberto I, "Sapienza" University of
Rome, Viale Regina Elena 326, 00161, Rome, Italy.

To report long-term outcomes and toxicity rates after chemotherapy (CHT) followed
by radiotherapy (RT) in the highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) era in
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) positive patients with head and neck diffuse
large B cell lymphomas (HN-DLBCL). Clinical data concerning consecutive HIV
patients treated for DLBCL located in head and neck region with CHT and RT were
retrospectively reviewed. Systemic treatment consisted of combination CHT agents 
given with concomitant HAART and regimen was left to oncologists' discretion.
Involved field RT was delivered at a total dose of 30-36 Gy (2 Gy per fraction). 
Survival rates were estimated using the Kaplan-Meier method. Toxicity was
evaluated using National Cancer Institute's Common Terminology Criteria for
Adverse Events. Overall, 13 patients were included. There were no missing data.
Eight patients had advanced disease (stage III-IV = 8; 61.5%). The most common
primary tumor location was oral cavity (n = 7) with large mass at presentation.
All patients completed the programmed treatment. Severe acute toxicity was
observed in one patient, only. Overall, three patients had died and no
treatment-related deaths occurred. After a median follow-up of 152 months, the
20-year overall survival and disease-free survival rates were 65.9 and 41.5%,
respectively. Globally, there were no RT-related late complications. This data
analysis suggested that CHT followed by RT can be safety proposed in the
management of patients with HIV-related HN-DLBCL in the HAART era. Further
investigations are necessary to validate our results.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-017-4672-y 
PMID: 28702826  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
