

2345. Virchows Arch. 2012 Sep;461(3):283-90. doi: 10.1007/s00428-012-1290-3. Epub 2012 
Aug 2.

Cancer of unknown primary originating from oropharyngeal carcinomas are strongly 
correlated to HPV positivity.

Zengel P(1), Assmann G, Mollenhauer M, Jung A, Sotlar K, Kirchner T, Ihrler S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Grosshadern Medical 
Center, Ludwig Maximilian University, Marchioninistrasse 15, 81377 Munich,
Germany. pamela.zengel@med.uni-muenchen.de

Human papillomavirus (HPV)-associated oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma
(OSCC) has been identified as a distinct entity within squamous cell carcinoma of
the head and neck. It is associated with special characteristics and is
preponderantly restricted to palatial tonsils and base of tongue. These primary
locations have for long been associated with the clinical situation of cancer of 
unknown primary (CUP). In order to investigate the putative relationship between 
CUP and HPV, we investigated 26 patients who initially presented as CUP and were 
finally diagnosed with carcinomas of these two locations. Twenty-one cases proved
to be positive for high-risk HPV. Primary carcinomas were small and frequently
presented in a submucosal location. HPV-positive carcinomas, presented more often
in women, showed atypical basaloid differentiation and correlated to cystic lymph
node metastases. This study demonstrates an over-representation of HPV-associated
OSCC in patients who were initially diagnosed with CUP. This finding indicates a 
strong relationship between HPV-association and CUP in OSCC. The frequent
manifestation as CUP is presumably caused by the unusual predisposition for small
size and submucosal location combined with early lymphatic metastization. In
order not to miss clinically occult carcinomas, consequent interdisciplinary
cooperation in combination with meticulous histological workup is mandatory.

DOI: 10.1007/s00428-012-1290-3 
PMID: 22855133  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
