

2346. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2013 Jul 30;14:224. doi: 10.1186/1471-2474-14-224.

Bone turnover and bone mineral density in HIV-1 infected Chinese taking highly
active antiretroviral therapy -a prospective observational study.

Zhang L, Su Y, Hsieh E, Xia W, Xie J, Han Y, Cao Y, Li Y, Song X, Zhu T, Li T, Yu
W.

BACKGROUND: Low bone mass and high bone turnover have been reported in
HIV-infected individuals, both as a consequence of HIV infection itself, as well 
as from treatment with highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART). The purpose 
of this study is to evaluate the impact of HAART on bone mineral density and bone
turnover in HIV-1 infected Chinese patients.
METHODS: Forty HIV-1 infected patients were enrolled in this study; all patients 
were followed through 48 weeks, and 17 patients completed 96 weeks. Bone mineral 
density (BMD), procollagen type 1 N-terminal propeptide (P1NP), collagen type 1
cross-linked C-telopeptide (β-CTX), parathyroid hormone (PTH), and 25-OH vitamin 
D levels were measured at baseline, 48 and 96 weeks. Baseline measurements were
compared with an age-, gender-, and BMI-matched healthy control population.
RESULTS: At baseline, raw BMD in the lumbar spine of HIV-1 infected patients was 
significantly lower than that of healthy controls (1.138 ± 0.112 g/cm2 vs.
1.195 ± 0.139 g/cm2, p = 0.047). During the first 48 weeks after initiating
HAART, BMD of lumbar spine, femoral neck, and total hip decreased significantly
in HIV-1 infected patients, with annual percent decline ranging from 1.78-3.28%. 
However, from week 48 to 96, BMD remained stable. Baseline levels of β-CTX
(0.31 ± 0.16 ng/mL vs. 0.42 ± 0.19 ng/mL, p = 0.008) and P1NP
(32.96 ± 14.00 ng/mL vs. 55.82 ± 26.87 ng/mL, p = 0.05) were lower in
HIV-infected patients compared with controls, respectively. Both β-CTX and P1NP
levels increased after onset of HAART until week 48, and remained elevated during
the next 48 weeks. 25-OH vitamin D in HIV-infected patients was lower at baseline
compared to healthy controls, but this difference was not statistically
significant. PTH, however, was higher in HIV patients at baseline, and showed a
significant increase throughout the study.
CONCLUSIONS: Chinese adults with HIV-1 infection have low bone turnover prior to 
HAART as well as lower raw BMD of the lumbar spine compared with healthy
controls, with further bone loss occurring following the initiation of HAART. The
long-term clinical implications of these findings remain unclear at this time.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2474-14-224 
PMCID: PMC3734166
PMID: 23899016  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
