

2349. J Clin Exp Hematop. 2013;53(1):87-93.

Atypical hyaline vascular-type castleman's disease with thrombocytopenia,
anasarca, fever, and systemic lymphadenopathy.

Iwaki N(1), Sato Y, Takata K, Kondo E, Ohno K, Takeuchi M, Orita Y, Nakao S,
Yoshino T.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology Head and Neck Surgery, Okayama University Graduate
School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Shikata-cho, Okayama, 
Japan.

Recently, atypical Castleman's disease (CD) was reported in Japan. This disease
is considered as TAFRO syndrome or non-idiopathic plasmacytic lymphadenopathy
(IPL), a constellation of clinical symptoms, namely, thrombocytopenia, anasarca, 
fever, reticulin fibrosis, and organomegaly without hyper-γ-globulinemia.
Histopathologically, this disease is similar to hyaline vascular (HV)-type CD.
Here, we present a 43-year-old Japanese woman meeting the clinical criteria of
TAFRO syndrome who was successfully treated with combined corticosteroid therapy.
She showed a rapidly progressive course of thrombocytopenia, systemic
lymphadenopathy, fever, anasarca, and increase in acute inflammatory proteins
without hyper-γ-globulinemia. Lymph node biopsy was performed and revealed
HV-type CD without human herpes virus 8 infection, which was
clinicopathologically compatible with non-IPL. The association of these atypical 
features with well-known multicentric Castleman's disease (MCD), namely, HV-type 
histology with systemic lymphadenopathy, marked thrombocytopenia even with a high
level of interleukin-6, and increased acute inflammatory proteins without
hyper-γ-globulinemia, suggests that TAFRO syndrome as presented in our case is a 
novel entity, which may have been diagnosed as MCD in the past. To define this
novel entity more clearly and to demonstrate its etiology, further nationwide
surveys of this syndrome and MCD are needed.


PMID: 23801139  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
