

2352. Gene. 2009 Dec 15;448(2):151-67. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2009.08.006. Epub 2009 Aug
21.

Loss of epigenetic silencing in tumors preferentially affects primate-specific
retroelements.

Szpakowski S(1), Sun X, Lage JM, Dyer A, Rubinstein J, Kowalski D, Sasaki C,
Costa J, Lizardi PM.

Author information: 
(1)Interdepartmental Program in Computational, Biology and Bioinformatics, Yale
University School of Medicine, Room LH-208, 310 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT
06520, USA.

Close to 50% of the human genome harbors repetitive sequences originally derived 
from mobile DNA elements, and in normal cells, this sequence compartment is
tightly regulated by epigenetic silencing mechanisms involving chromatin-mediated
repression. In cancer cells, repetitive DNA elements suffer abnormal
demethylation, with potential loss of silencing. We used a genome-wide microarray
approach to measure DNA methylation changes in cancers of the head and neck and
to compare these changes to alterations found in adjacent non-tumor tissues. We
observed specific alterations at thousands of small clusters of CpG dinucleotides
associated with DNA repeats. Among the 257,599 repetitive elements probed, 5% to 
8% showed disease-related DNA methylation alterations. In dysplasia, a large
number of local events of loss of methylation appear in apparently stochastic
fashion. Loss of DNA methylation is most pronounced for certain members of the
SVA, HERV, LINE-1P, AluY, and MaLR families. The methylation levels of
retrotransposons are discretely stratified, with younger elements being highly
methylated in healthy tissues, while in tumors, these young elements suffer the
most dramatic loss of methylation. Wilcoxon test statistics reveals that a subset
of primate LINE-1 elements is demethylated preferentially in tumors, as compared 
to non-tumoral adjacent tissue. Sequence analysis of these strongly demethylated 
elements reveals genomic loci harboring full length, as opposed to truncated
elements, while possible enrichment for functional LINE-1 ORFs is weaker. Our
analysis suggests that, in non-tumor adjacent tissues, there is generalized and
highly variable disruption of epigenetic control across the repetitive DNA
compartment, while in tumor cells, a specific subset of LINE-1 retrotransposons
that arose during primate evolution suffers the most dramatic DNA methylation
alterations.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2009.08.006 
PMCID: PMC2783545
PMID: 19699787  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
