
Conflict of interest statement: Competing financial interests: The authors
declare no competing financial interests.


2354. Am J Surg Pathol. 2011 Nov;35(11):1679-84. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3182299cde.

Human papillomavirus-related small cell carcinoma of the oropharynx.

Bishop JA(1), Westra WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore,
MD, USA.

Human papillomavirus (HPV)-related oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSqCC)
represents an important subgroup of head and neck cancer that is characterized by
a distinct risk factor profile, a relatively consistent microscopic appearance,
and a favorable prognosis. A growing experience with HPV testing of OPSqCCs has
uncovered variants that deviate from prototypic HPV-related cancer with respect
to morphology but not clinical behavior. In effect, HPV positivity confers a
favorable prognosis independent of morphologic subtype. We report 5 cases of
HPV-related oropharyngeal carcinomas with well-developed features of small cell
carcinoma (SCC) to define the prognostic impact of HPV positivity in a tumor type
universally regarded as highly aggressive. Four of the SCCs arose in association 
with a conventional HPV-related OPSqCC. All 5 SCCs were HPV positive by in situ
hybridization. By immunohistochemistry, all 5 cases were p16 positive,
synaptophysin positive, and cytokeratin 5/6 negative. Four of the patients were
men. The mean age was 61 years (range, 49 to 67 y). The SCCs were associated with
metastatic spread to distant sites (60%) and poor survival outcomes: 3 patients
(60%) died as a result of their disease (mean survival time, 10 mo; range, 6 to
15 mo). HPV testing has disclosed a previously unrecognized variant of
HPV-related oropharyngeal carcinoma that is microscopically characterized by the 
small cell phenotype. Recognition of this component, even in association with
conventional HPV-related OPSqCC, is important as it may indicate an aggressive
phenotype that supersedes HPV positivity as a prognostic indicator.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3182299cde 
PMCID: PMC3193931
PMID: 21997688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
