

2360. Anticancer Res. 2013 Mar;33(3):1215-20.

Inactivation of 9q22.3 tumor suppressor genes predict outcome for patients with
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Ghosh A(1), Maiti GP, Bandopadhyay MN, Chakraborty J, Biswas J, Roychoudhury S,
Panda CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncogene Regulation, Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute, 37,
S.P. Mukherjee Road, Kolkata 700026, India.

AIM: This study examined the prognostic significance of candidate tumor
suppressor genes (TSGs) PHD finger protein-2 (PHF2), Fanconi anaemia
complementation group C (FANCC) and human homologue of Drosophila patched gene
(PTCH1), in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) treated primarily with 
surgery, or surgery followed by adjuvant radiotherapy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Eighty-four patients with HNSCC were followed-up for
recurrence/death for up to five years after diagnosis. Molecular alterations
(deletion/methylation) of TSGs and human papilloma virus (HPV) status were
determined in previous studies of our group. Statistical analyses of correlation 
of genetic alterations with treatment response and survival were carried out.
RESULTS: Alterations of FANCC and PTCH1 were significantly associated with
locoregional recurrence/death. In the surgery with adjuvant radiotherapy-group
(n=56), patients showing alterations in FANCC and in PTCH1 were seven- and
six-times, respectively, more likely to have locoregional recurrence compared to 
those with no alterations. In addition, the presence of alterations of both FANCC
and PTCH1 had remarkable prognostic significance.
CONCLUSION: FANCC and PTCH1 alterations might be used as molecular markers for
prognosis and to develop strategies for effective treatment planning.


PMID: 23482805  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
