

2362. Front Med. 2012 Dec;6(4):339-53. doi: 10.1007/s11684-012-0213-7. Epub 2012 Sep
28.

Basic consideration of research strategies for head and neck cancer.

Gao J(1), Panizza B, Johnson NW, Coman S, Clough AR.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine and Dentistry, James Cook University, Cairns, QLD 4878,
Australia. jin.gao@jcu.edu.au

Head and neck cancer (HNC) consists of a group of malignancies affecting closely 
related anatomical regions of the upper aerodigestive tract (UADT), including the
oral cavity, salivary glands, upper and lower jaw bones and facial skin; the
nasal cavity, paranasal sinuses, pharynx, larynx and thyroid gland (although the 
latter is often excluded and considered as part of endocrine neoplasms). Of
these, 90% of HNCs are histologically squamous cell carcinomas originating from
the mucosal lining. These malignancies are strongly associated with certain
environmental and life-style risk factors, principally tobacco in both smoked and
smokeless forms, excessive alcohol consumption, diets poor in antioxidants and
essential micronutrients, UV light, chemicals used in certain workplaces, and
viruses, principally certain strains of human papillomavirus (HPV) and
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). These cancers are frequently aggressive in their
biological behaviour with local invasion and metastasis to lymph nodes in the
neck. Since most patients are already at late stages of disease at the time of
diagnosis, the desirable practice of early diagnosis (first sign of the malignant
lesion at an initial stage) and early treatment, a critical priority to save
lives and retain quality of life, is difficult to implement. Thus, primary
prevention has been set as a key goal. This article aims to reinforce the basic
knowledge of aetiology, key risk factors related to the development of head and
neck cancer, basic features of clinical appearance of this group of cancers, and 
strategies for prevention and early detection.We also suggest basic research
strategies on the basis of current knowledge, which should ultimately lead to the
improvement of clinical management.

DOI: 10.1007/s11684-012-0213-7 
PMID: 23054500  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
