

2367. Cancer Res. 2010 Sep 15;70(18):7199-208. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-4733. Epub
2010 Aug 24.

Human papillomavirus seropositivity synergizes with MDM2 variants to increase the
risk of oral squamous cell carcinoma.

Chen X(1), Sturgis EM, Lei D, Dahlstrom K, Wei Q, Li G.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Head and Neck Surgery and Epidemiology, The University of Texas
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The increasing incidence of oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) in young adults
has been associated with sexually transmitted infections of human papillomavirus 
(HPV), particularly HPV16. Given the roles of p53 in tumor suppression and of HPV
E6 and MDM2 oncoproteins in p53 degradation, we evaluated HPV16 L1 seropositivity
and MDM2 promoter variants to examine their possible associations with OSCC risk 
in a case-control study of 325 patients and 335 cancer-free matched controls.
Compared with individuals having MDM2-rs2279744 GT or GG genotypes and HPV16 L1
seronegativity, the TT genotype and HPV16 L1 seronegativity were found to be
associated with an odds ratio (OR) of 1.25 [95% confidence interval (CI),
1.06-2.19] for OSCC risk, and GT/GG and HPV16 L1 seropositivity were associated
with an OR of 2.81 (95% CI, 1.67-4.74). For those with both the TT genotype and
HPV16 L1 seropositivity, the associated OR was 5.57 (95% CI, 2.93-10.6). Similar 
results were observed for the MDM2-rs937283 polymorphism. Moreover, there was a
borderline significant or significant interaction between the individual or
combined MDM2 genotypes of the two polymorphisms and HPV16 L1 seropositivity
(P(int) = 0.060 for MDM2-rs2279744, P(int) = 0.009 for MDM2-rs937283, and P(int) 
= 0.005 for the combined MDM2 genotypes) on risk of OSCC. Notably, that effect
modification was particularly pronounced in never smokers and never drinkers, and
for oropharyngeal as opposed to oral cavity cancer. Taken together, our results
indicate that the risk of OSCC associated with HPV16 L1 seropositivity is
modified by MDM2 promoter polymorphisms.

Â©2010 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-4733 
PMCID: PMC2940953
PMID: 20736372  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
