

2368. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2010 Dec;136(12):1267-73. doi:
10.1001/archoto.2010.211.

Correlation of cellular immunity with human papillomavirus 16 status and outcome 
in patients with advanced oropharyngeal cancer.

Wansom D(1), Light E, Worden F, Prince M, Urba S, Chepeha DB, Cordell K, Eisbruch
A, Taylor J, D'Silva N, Moyer J, Bradford CR, Kurnit D, Kumar B, Carey TE, Wolf
GT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Michigan
Health System, 1904 H Taubman, PO Box 5312, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Comment in
    Immunotherapy. 2011 Apr;3(4):469-73.

OBJECTIVE: to determine whether the favorable outcome associated with human
papillomavirus (HPV) 16-positive oropharyngeal cancer is related to a patient's
adaptive immunity.
SETTING: academic medical center.
PATIENTS: forty-seven of 66 previously untreated patients (6 of 20 patients with 
stage III and 41 of 46 with stage IV cancer) in a prospective clinical trial of
chemoradiotherapy.
INTERVENTION: all patients were treated with a single course of neoadjuvant
chemotherapy followed by either surgery (for nonresponders) or chemoradiotherapy.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: pretreatment levels (percentages and absolute counts) of
CD3, CD4, CD8, natural killer, and B cells and overall white blood cell counts
were measured by flow cytometry. Correlations of subsets with HPV-16 status,
tumor subsite, cancer stage, T class, N class, smoking status, performance
status, sex, response to chemoradiotherapy, p53 mutation type, epidermal growth
factor receptor expression, and disease-specific and overall survival were
determined.
RESULTS: after a median follow-up of 6.6 years, improved survival was associated 
with an elevated percentage of CD8 cells (P = .04), a low CD4:CD8 ratio (P =
.01), low epidermal growth factor receptor expression (P = .002), and HPV status 
(P = .02). The percentage of CD8 cells was significantly higher (P = .04) and the
CD4:CD8 ratio was significantly lower (P = .02) in HPV-16-positive patients. A
higher percentage of CD8 cells was associated with response to induction
chemotherapy (P = .02) and complete tumor response after chemoradiotherapy (P =
.045).
CONCLUSION: these findings confirm previous correlations of outcome with
circulating CD8 cell levels and support the conjecture that improved adaptive
immunity may play a role in the favorable prognosis of patients with
HPV-16-positive cancers.

DOI: 10.1001/archoto.2010.211 
PMCID: PMC3342998
PMID: 21173378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
