

2369. Carcinogenesis. 2014 Jan;35(1):62-8. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt336. Epub 2013 Oct 8.

Potentially functional variants of p14ARF are associated with HPV-positive
oropharyngeal cancer patients and survival after definitive chemoradiotherapy.

Song X(1), Sturgis EM, Huang Z, Li X, Li C, Wei Q, Li G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Since p14 (ARF) and human papillomavirus (HPV) 16 E6/E7 oncoproteins are
important regulators participating in the p53/Rb pathways, genetic variations of 
p14 (ARF) may modify tumor HPV16 status and survival of HPV16-positive squamous
cell carcinoma of the oropharynx (SCCOP) patients. We determined tumor HPV16
status and expression of p14/p53 and genotyped p14 (ARF) -rs3731217 and
-rs3088440 polymorphisms in 552 incident SCCOP patients. We found that patients
having variant genotypes for each p14 (ARF) polymorphism were approximately two
or three times as likely to have HPV16-positive tumors compared with patients
with corresponding common homozygous genotype, and such an association was
particularly pronounced in patients with variant genotypes of both polymorphisms.
After definitive chemoradiotherapy, patients having p14 (ARF) rs3731217 TG/GG
variant genotypes had significantly better overall, disease-specific and
disease-free survival than those having TT genotype, respectively. Multivariable 
analysis found that patients with p14 (ARF) -rs3731217 TT genotype had an ~7-,
11- and 3-fold increased risk for death overall, death due to SCCOP and
recurrence than those with TG/GG variant genotypes, respectively. Furthermore,
such significantly prognostic effect was also found when survival analysis was
limited to HPV16-positive patients. Additionally, potentially functional
relevance of the two variants was characterized to explore the genotype-phenotype
correlation. Our findings indicate p14 (ARF) variants may predict tumor
HPV16-positive SCCOP patients and survival.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/bgt336 
PMCID: PMC3871940
PMID: 24104554  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
