

2372. Oncol Rep. 2016 Jan;35(1):89-98. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4374. Epub 2015 Nov 2.

Effects of lentivirus-mediated shRNA targeting integrin-linked kinase on oral
squamous cell carcinoma in vitro and in vivo.

Que L(1), Zhao D(2), Tang XF(3), Liu JY(3), Zhang XY(1), Zhan YH(1), Zhang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041,
P.R. China.
(2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Head and Neck Carcinoma, West China College of Stomatology,
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, P.R. China.

Integrin-linked kinase (ILK), a highly conserved intracellular protein of
serine/threonine protein kinase activities, which is associated with the integrin
and growth factor receptor signaling pathway, is involved in the regulation of
cell proliferation, apoptosis, differentiation, migration and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Findings of a previous study showed that
ILK overexpression was strongly correlated with a more aggressive tumor
phenotype, recurrence and poor survival for oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC)
patients, as well as some EMT markers. In order to investigate the underlying
mechanisms involved, a lentivirus-mediated short hairpin RNA (shRNA) was employed
to downregulate ILK. The results showed that the knockdown of ILK inhibited cell 
growth, adhesion and invasion ability in vitro, and OSCC cells deficient of ILK
were blocked in the S phase and underwent apoptosis. Additionally, ILK shRNA
inhibited EMT by impairing the expression of Snail, Slug and Twist2 and enhacning
E-cadherin expression. ILK shRNA suppressed the phosphorylation of downstream
signaling targets Akt and GSk-3Î². In addition, the knockdown of ILK inhibited
tumor growth, invasion and metastasis of xenograft tumors in vivo. These results 
suggested that ILK is a promising therapeutic target for the treatment of OSCC.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2015.4374 
PMID: 26531674  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
