

2379. J Comput Assist Tomogr. 2014 Jan-Feb;38(1):9-13. doi:
10.1097/RCT.0b013e3182a77699.

Nasopharyngeal cystic lesions: Tornwaldt and mucous retention cysts of the
nasopharynx: findings on MR imaging.

Sekiya K(1), Watanabe M, Nadgir RN, Buch K, Flower EN, Kaneda T, Sakai O.

Author information: 
(1)From the *Department of Radiology, Boston Medical Center, Boston University
School of Medicine, Boston, MA; †Department of Radiology, Nihon University School
of Dentistry at Matsudo, Chiba, Japan; and ‡Department of Otolaryngology-Head and
Neck Surgery, Boston Medical Center, Boston University School of Medicine,
Boston, MA.

OBJECTIVE: Nasopharyngeal cystic lesions are commonly encountered on magnetic
resonance imaging with significantly overlapped imaging characteristics. The
purpose of this study was to determine the prevalence and distinguishing imaging 
features of cystic lesions in the nasopharynx in the largest patient series to
date.
METHODS: After institutional review board approval, consecutive head magnetic
resonance images of 3000 patients performed at 1.5 T between June 2010 and April 
2011 were retrospectively reviewed for cystic nasopharyngeal lesions. Location,
size, and signal characteristic of cystic lesions were recorded. Electronic
medical records were reviewed for patient demographics, symptoms, and underlying 
conditions.
RESULTS: Among 3000 patients, 6% had Tornwaldt cysts (peak prevalence, 51-60
years old) and 10% had mucous retention cysts (peak prevalence, 41-50 years old).
A significant correlation between human immunodeficiency virus infection and
mucous retention cysts was observed (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of Tornwaldt cysts was slightly higher than
previously described in the literature. Additionally, younger and older patients 
had the lowest prevalence of Tornwaldt cyst, suggesting these lesions are
acquired and subsequently involute with time. A significant correlation was
observed between human immunodeficiency virus infection and mucous retention
cysts.

DOI: 10.1097/RCT.0b013e3182a77699 
PMID: 24378893  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
