

2384. J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2011 Feb;40 Suppl 1:S65-9.

Oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma and human papillomavirus-associated cancers
in women: epidemiologic evaluation of association.

Biron VL(1), Côté DW, Seikaly H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery,
University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB.

OBJECTIVE: Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a well-established etiologic factor in
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC). The objective of this study was to
evaluate the association between OPSCC and HPV-related cancerous lesions of the
cervix.
METHODS: Demographic, survival, and pathologic data on all female patients
diagnosed with OPSCC in Alberta between 1998 and 2008 were collected. A review of
pathology reports in these patients was undertaken to identify HPV-related
cancerous lesions of the cervix. Standardized incidence ratios (SIRs) of cervical
cancer in oropharyngeal cancer patients were calculated using control data
obtained from provincial cancer surveillance. Overall and disease-specific
survival of patients with OPSCC only versus patients with OPSCC and cervical
cancer was calculated using Kaplan-Meier and Cox regression models.
RESULTS: Our results show a significantly elevated overall incidence of cervical 
cancer in women with OPSCC in comparison to the control population (SIR 29.4, 95%
CI 12.05-74.98). Patients with OPSCC and cervical cancer also had a significantly
improved disease-specific survival in comparison to patients with no history of
cervical cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: Women with OPSCC have a significantly elevated risk of developing
HPV-related genital cancers, which suggests frequent HPV coinfection of
oropharyngeal and genital tissues in this patient population. Women with OPSCC
with cervical cancer also have an improved disease-specific survival, as
previously shown with HPV-associated OPSCC.


PMID: 21453664  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
