

2392. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2012 Jul;269(7):1795-804. doi:
10.1007/s00405-012-1937-3. Epub 2012 Feb 5.

Possible implication of Mdm2 as a prognostic marker in invasive laryngeal
carcinoma.

Hassumi-Fukasawa MK(1), Miranda-Camargo FA, Guimarães MC, Simões RT, Donadi EA,
Soares CP, Soares EG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, University of 
São Paulo, Avenida dos Bandeirantes 3900, 14049-900 Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil.
marcelahassumi@usp.br

Laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma is one of the most common malignant neoplasms
of the head and neck. In Brazil, laryngeal tumors represent 2% of all cancers and
are associated with approximately 3,000 deaths annually. Human papillomavirus
(HPV) has been reported to play an important role in the etiology of laryngeal
cancer. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the expression of p53, p27, 
and Mdm2 in laryngeal carcinomas. Sixty-three larynx biopsies were selected for
the study, including 9 in situ laryngeal carcinomas, 27 laryngeal carcinomas
without metastasis and 27 laryngeal carcinomas with metastasis. Twenty-seven
cervical lymph nodes from patients with metastatic lesions were also evaluated.
The expression levels of p53, p27, and Mdm2 were assessed by immunohistochemistry
using a computer-assisted system. HPV detection and typing were performed using
PCR, and the HPV types that were evaluated included HPV 6, 11, 16, 18, 31 and 33.
Out of 63 patients, 53 (84.1%) were positive for β-globin (internal control), and
10 (15.9%) were β-globin negative and therefore excluded from the evaluation.
Thus, 7 (13.2%) out of 53 patients were HPV positive, and 46 (86.8%) out of 53
patients were HPV negative. Statistically significant differences (p < 0.05) in
Mdm2 expression levels were observed in the in situ laryngeal carcinoma samples
compared with the laryngeal carcinoma samples with metastasis. No statistically
significant differences (p > 0.05) in either p53 or p27 expression levels were
detected. These findings suggest that Mdm2 may be associated with the
invasiveness and aggressiveness of laryngeal carcinomas.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-012-1937-3 
PMID: 22310835  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
