

2397. J Biol Chem. 2013 Mar 29;288(13):9532-48. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.441238. Epub 2013
Feb 4.

Mammalian myosin-18A, a highly divergent myosin.

Guzik-Lendrum S(1), Heissler SM, Billington N, Takagi Y, Yang Y, Knight PJ,
Homsher E, Sellers JR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Physiology, NHLBI, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892-8015, USA.

The Mus musculus myosin-18A gene is expressed as two alternatively spliced
isoforms, α and β, with reported roles in Golgi localization, in maintenance of
cytoskeleton, and as receptors for immunological surfactant proteins. Both
myosin-18A isoforms feature a myosin motor domain, a single predicted IQ motif,
and a long coiled-coil reminiscent of myosin-2. The myosin-18Aα isoform,
additionally, has an N-terminal PDZ domain. Recombinant heavy meromyosin- and
subfragment-1 (S1)-like constructs for both myosin-18Aα and -18β species were
purified from the baculovirus/Sf9 cell expression system. These constructs bound 
both essential and regulatory light chains, indicating an additional noncanonical
light chain binding site in the neck. Myosin-18Aα-S1 and -18Aβ-S1 molecules bound
actin weakly with Kd values of 4.9 and 54 μm, respectively. The actin binding
data could be modeled by assuming an equilibrium between two myosin
conformations, a competent and an incompetent form to bind actin. Actin binding
was unchanged by presence of nucleotide. Both myosin-18A isoforms bound
N-methylanthraniloyl-nucleotides, but the rate of ATP hydrolysis was very slow
(<0.002 s(-1)) and not significantly enhanced by actin. Phosphorylation of the
regulatory light chain had no effect on ATP hydrolysis, and neither did the
addition of tropomyosin or of GOLPH3, a myosin-18A binding partner. Electron
microscopy of myosin-18A-S1 showed that the lever is strongly angled with respect
to the long axis of the motor domain, suggesting a pre-power stroke conformation 
regardless of the presence of ATP. These data lead us to conclude that myosin-18A
does not operate as a traditional molecular motor in cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.441238 
PMCID: PMC3611021
PMID: 23382379  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
