

2406. Ann Surg Oncol. 2012 Jul;19(7):2311-9. doi: 10.1245/s10434-012-2275-9. Epub 2012 
Mar 9.

Management of the neck in the setting of definitive chemoradiation: is there a
consensus? A GETTEC study.

Thariat J(1), Hamoir M, Garrel R, Cosmidis A, Dassonville O, Janot, Righini CA,
Vedrine PO, Prades JM, Lacau-Saint-Guily J, Jegoux F, Malard O, De Mones E,
Benlyazid A, Bensadoun RJ, Baujat B, Merol JC, Ferron C, Scavennec C, Salvan D,
Mallet Y, Moriniere S, Vergez S, Choussy O, Dollivet G, Guevara N, Ceruse P, De
Raucourt D, Lallemant B, Lawson G, Lindas P, Poupart M, Duflo S, Dufour X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiotherapy, Center Antoine-Lacassagne, IUFC, Nice, France.
jthariat@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: The management of the neck remains controversial in the definitive
chemoradiation setting of advanced N2-3 head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.
Most published data favor omission of neck dissection (ND) after complete
response for N2-3 or selective ND for residual disease
METHODS: We studied the patterns of care in the French-Belgian Groupe d'Etude des
Tumeurs de la TÃªte Et du Cou (GETTEC) through a questionnaire-based survey.
RESULTS: Eighteen percent of institutions never performed up-front ND, 20%
rarely, 40% sometimes, 14% often, and 8% systematically. Induction chemotherapy
was indicated in 30% of the cases, and most ND were performed either between
induction and radiation or after chemoradiation for residual disease. Response to
chemoradiation was assessed by computed tomographic scan and positron emission
tomography in 72% of cases. Selective ND was more common than radical ND.
CONCLUSIONS: Omission of ND based on computed tomographic scan and positron
emission tomography-based complete response to chemoradiation is the most common 
strategy for advanced nodal disease among centers. However, neck management
strategies vary among institutions, and some institutions continue advocating
systematic ND before irradiation. The new treatment options and the changing
epidemiology, namely docetaxel-based induction chemotherapy and human papilloma
virus-related head and neck squamous cell carcinoma having better response
profiles and prognosis, are adding to the nonconsensual approach. The best
therapeutic index in terms of neck management remains to be defined in this
evolving context.

DOI: 10.1245/s10434-012-2275-9 
PMID: 22402813  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
