

2408. Cancer Res. 2013 Oct 1;73(19):5996-6003. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0881. Epub
2013 Aug 8.

Telomere length in peripheral blood lymphocytes contributes to the development of
HPV-associated oropharyngeal carcinoma.

Zhang Y(1), Sturgis EM, Dahlstrom KR, Wen J, Liu H, Wei Q, Li G, Liu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Departments of Head and Neck Surgery, and Epidemiology,
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; and Department
of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital
Medical University, Beijing, China.

Sexual transmission of human papillomavirus (HPV), particularly HPV16, has been
associated with an increasing incidence of oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma 
(OPC). Telomere shortening results in chromosomal instability, subsequently
leading to cancer development. Given that HPV16 can affect telomerase activity
and telomere length, we conjectured that telomere length in peripheral blood
lymphocytes (PBL) might affect the risk of HPV16-associated OPC and tumor HPV16
status in patients. Telomere length in PBLs and HPV16 serologic status were
measured in peripheral blood samples in 188 patients with OPC, 137 patients with 
oral cavity cancer (OCC) and 335 controls of non-Hispanic Whites. Tumor HPV
status was determined in 349 OPC cases. ORs and 95% confidence intervals were
calculated in univariate and multivariable logistic regression models. Overall,
as compared with the long telomere length, short telomere length was
significantly associated with a moderately increased risk of OPC but not with
increased risk of OCC. When we stratified the data by HPV16 serologic status,
using long telomere length and HPV16 seronegativity as the reference group, we
found that the risk associated with HPV16 seropositivity was higher among
patients with OPC with short telomere length. Notably, such risk was particularly
pronounced in never smokers, never drinkers, and those more than 50 years of age.
Furthermore, short telomere length was also associated significantly with tumor
HPV-positive OPC. Together, our findings suggest that telomere length in PBLs may
be associated with higher risk of HPV16-associated OPC and tumor HPV16 status,
particularly in certain patient subgroups. Larger studies are needed to validate 
these findings.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0881 
PMCID: PMC3790860
PMID: 23928994  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
