

2411. Int J Cancer. 2010 Apr 15;126(8):1882-1894. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24911.

Biological and clinical relevance of transcriptionally active human
papillomavirus (HPV) infection in oropharynx squamous cell carcinoma.

Jung AC(1), Briolat J(2), Millon R(1), de Reyniès A(3), Rickman D(3), Thomas
E(3), Abecassis J(1), Clavel C(2), Wasylyk B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centre Régional de Lutte Contre le Cancer Paul Strauss, Laboratoire de
Biologie Tumorale, 3 Rue de la porte de l'Hôpital, Strasbourg Cedex, France.
(2)INSERM UMRS 903, Laboratoire Pol Bouin, IFR 53, CHU Maison Blanche, 45 Rue
Cognacq- Jay, Reims, France.
(3)Programme Carte d'Identité des Tumeurs (CIT), Ligue Nationale Contre le
Cancer, 14 Rue Corvisart, Paris, France.
(4)IGBMC, UMR 7104 CNRS UDS-U 964 INSERM, 1 Rue Laurent Fries, Illkirch
Graffenstaden, France.

Human papillomaviruses (HPV) are associated with a subset of head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), particularly HPV16. This study analyzed the
presence and genotype of high risk HPVs, viral DNA load and transcription of the 
E6/E7 mRNAs, in 231 consecutive HNSCC. Twelve out of 30 HPV16 DNA-positive tumors
displayed high E6/E7 mRNAs levels and were localized in the oropharyngeal region.
While HPV-free and non-transcriptionally active HPV-related patients showed
similar 5-years survival rates, E6/E7 expression was associated with a better
prognosis. This emphasizes the importance of considering the transcriptional
status of HPV-positive tumors for patient stratification. A gene expression
profiling analysis of these different types of tumors was carried out. The most
significant differentially expressed gene was CDKN2A, a known biomarker for
HPV-related cancer. Assessing both the expression level of the E6/E7 mRNAs and of
CDKN2A in HNSCC is required to detect active HPV infection. Chromosomic
alterations were investigated by Comparative Genomic Hybridation (CGH) analysis
of tumors with transcriptionally active HPV and HPV-negative tumors. The loss of 
the chromosomal region 16q was found to be a major genetic event in HPV-positive 
lesions. A cluster of genes located in 16q21-24 displayed decreased expression
levels, notably APP-BP1 that is involved in the modulation of the transcriptional
activity of p53. In conclusion, this study highlights important criteria required
to predict clinically active HPV infection, identifies new biological pathways
implicated in HPV tumorigenesis and increases the understanding of HPV-HNSCC
physiopathology that is required to develop new targets for therapy.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.24911 
PMID: 19795456  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
