

2416. Kathmandu Univ Med J (KUMJ). 2017 Jan.-Mar.;15(57):75-77.

Awareness and Knowledge of Oral Cancer among Medical Students in Kathmandu
University School of Medical Sciences.

Pokharel M (1), Shrestha I (1), Dhakal A (1), Amatya RC (1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, Kathmandu
University School of Medical Sciences, Dhulikhel Hospital, Kathmandu University
Hospital, Dhulikhel Hospital, Kavre, Nepal.

Background Oral cancer is a major public health problem worldwide. It has high
mortality rates and chances of survival is relatively superior when detected
early. Lack of knowledge and awareness about oral cancer among medical students
may contribute to delay in diagnosis and treatment. Objective To assess awareness
and knowledge of oral cancer among medical students. Method A cross-sectional
study conducted among 286 students by Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head 
& Neck surgery, Kathmandu University School of Medical sciences between July to
August 2016. A questionnaire with questions on socio-demographic profile,
awareness and knowledge of oral cancer was used. Independent sample t test and
Pearson Chi-square tests were used for statistical analysis. Result Out of 329
students approached, 286 participated in the study yielding a response rate of
86.9%. Symptoms of oral cancer as reported were ulceration in mouth (92.3%), oral
bleeding (85.0%),whitish or reddish patch (84.3%), halitosis (75.5%) and swelling
in neck (74.5%), trismus (69.2%), numbness (67.1%), loosening of teeth (49.3%)
and tooth sensitivity (41.6%). The perceived risk factors were smoking (97.2%),
tobacco chewing (96.5%), chronic irritation (86.7%), immunodeficiency (83.9%),
poor oral hygiene (88.5%), human papilloma virus infection (82.5%), dietary
factors (81.1%), alcohol (79.4%), ill-fitting dentures (72.4%), hot spicy food
(65.4%) and hot beverages (58.0%). Significant differences were found between
pre-clinical and clinical students for knowledge of risk factors, signs and
symptoms of oral cancer (p<0.001). Conclusion There is deficiency of knowledge
among medical students about some aspects of oral cancer. Active involvement
while examining patients and taking biopsies of malignant and premalignant
lesions may help in improving students' knowledge about oral cancer.


PMID: 29446368  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
