

242. J Med Microbiol. 2017 Jul;66(7):1014-1022. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.000531. Epub 2017
Jul 21.

Evolutionary changes in the capsid P2 region of Australian strains of the
norovirus GII.Pe_GII.4.

Bruggink LD(1), Moselen JM(1), Roberts JA(1), Marshall JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Victorian Infectious Diseases Reference Laboratory, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia.

PURPOSE: The protruding (P) 2 region of the norovirus capsid is thought to
include hypervariable sites involved in receptor binding. This study examines the
changes that occurred in the P2 region of GII.Pe_GII.4 norovirus in the course of
its evolution from a precursor phase (2008-2009), to an intermediate phase (2010)
and finally to an epidemic phase (2012-2015).
METHODOLOGY: Twenty-two P2 region amino acid (aa) sequences (166 aa long) from
all phases of the evolution of the virus were compared and the changes
analysed.Results/key findings. Twenty sites in the P2 region underwent aa change 
and of these, 10 corresponded to previously proposed hypervariable sites and 10
to novel hypervariable sites. It was notable that aa changes at two sites, X and 
Y, only emerged as the epidemic phase progressed. 3D computer modelling of the P2
region indicated that neither X nor Y were in the uppermost 'crown', but further 
down in the 'neck' portion. The location of X and Y and the nature of aa change
at Y suggest these sites were important in enhancing the structural integrity of 
the capsid, which in turn may have facilitated the longer term viability of the
virus.
CONCLUSION: The current study helps establish the validity of previously proposed
hypervariable sites in the P2 region as well as indicating new ones. It also
provides quantitative and qualitative data on how these sites changed over the
evolutionary history of a particular norovirus strain.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.000531 
PMID: 28742004  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
