

2420. HNO. 2015 Nov;63(11):758-67. doi: 10.1007/s00106-015-0074-x.

[HPV-associated head and neck cancer : mutational signature and genomic
aberrations].

[Article in German]

Wagner S(1)(2), Würdemann N(3)(4), Hübbers C(5)(4), Reuschenbach M(6)(4), Prigge 
ES(6)(4), Wichmann G(7)(4), Hess J(8)(4), Dietz A(7)(4), Dürst M(9)(4), Tinhofer 
I(10)(4), von Knebel-Döberitz M(6)(4), Wittekindt C(3)(4), Klussmann JP(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)HNO-Tumorforschung, Klinik für HNO-Heilkunde, Kopf-, Halschirurgie,
Justus-Liebig-Universität Gießen, Schuberstr. 81 (BFS), 35392, Gießen,
Deutschland. steffen.wagner@hno.med.uni-giessen.de.
(2)The Human Papillomavirus Infection and Oropharyngeal Cancer Consortium (HOCC),
. steffen.wagner@hno.med.uni-giessen.de.
(3)HNO-Tumorforschung, Klinik für HNO-Heilkunde, Kopf-, Halschirurgie,
Justus-Liebig-Universität Gießen, Schuberstr. 81 (BFS), 35392, Gießen,
Deutschland.
(4)The Human Papillomavirus Infection and Oropharyngeal Cancer Consortium (HOCC).
(5)Jean-Uhrmacher-Institut für klinische HNO-Forschung, Universität zu Köln,
Köln, Deutschland.
(6)Abteilung für Angewandte Tumorbiologie, Institut für Pathologie,
Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Deutschland.
(7)Hals-Nasen-Ohren-Universitätsklinik Leipzig, Liebigstr. 10-14, 04103, Leipzig,
Deutschland.
(8)Sektion Experimentelle und Translationale Kopf-Hals-Onkologie,
Hals-Nasen-Ohrenklinik, Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Deutschland.
(9)Klinik für Frauenheilkunde, Universitätsklinikum Jena, Jena, Deutschland.
(10)Klinik für Radioonkologie und Strahlentherapie, Charité - Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, Berlin, Deutschland.

A significantly increasing proportion of oropharyngeal head and neck carcinomas
(OSCC) in North America and Europe are associated with human papillomavirus (HPV)
infections. HPV-related OSCC is regarded as a distinct tumor type with regard to 
its cellular, biologic, and clinical characteristics. Patients with HPV-related
OSCC have significantly better local control, but higher rates of regional lymph 
node and distant metastases as compared to patients with HPV-negative OSCC.
Classical molecular genetic investigations demonstrated specific chromosomal
aberration signatures in HPV-related OSCC, and recent developments in next
generation sequencing (NGS) technology have rendered possible the sequencing of
entire genomes, and thus detection of specific mutations, in just a few days.
Initial data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project obtained by using
genome-wide high throughput methods have confirmed that HPV-related OSCC contain 
fewer, albeit more specific mutations than HPV-negative tumors. Additionally,
these data revealed the presence of specific-potentially therapeutically
targetable-activating driver mutations in subgroups of HPV-positive OSCC, some of
which have a prognostic impact. Specific targeted NGS technologies provide new
possibilities for identification of diagnostic, prognostic, and predictive
biomarkers and the development of personalized cancer treatment. Patients with
HPV-positive tumors are likely to profit from these developments in the future,
since the genetic alterations are relatively homogenous and frequently lead to
signal pathway activation. There is an urgent need for network research
activities to carry out the necessary basic research in prospective cohort
studies.

DOI: 10.1007/s00106-015-0074-x 
PMID: 26507715  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
