

2421. Semin Ultrasound CT MR. 2014 Jun;35(3):263-71. doi: 10.1053/j.sult.2013.12.005.
Epub 2013 Dec 19.

The great mimickers: Castleman disease.

Bonekamp D(1), Hruban RH(2), Fishman EK(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Russell H. Morgan Department of Radiology and Radiological Science, The
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD. Electronic address: dboneka1@jhmi.edu.
(2)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD.
(3)The Russell H. Morgan Department of Radiology and Radiological Science, The
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD.

Castleman disease (CD) was first described and most commonly occurs in the form
of classic hyaline-vascular-type CD with hyperenhancing localized (unicentric)
nonneoplastic lymphadenopathy. CD may affect any body region including unusual
locations for isolated lymph node enlargement. This makes CD a great mimicker of 
more common benign and malignant masses in the neck, chest, abdomen, and pelvis. 
CD masses commonly raise the suspicion of lymphoma, paraganglioma, neuroendocrine
tumor, metastatic adenopathy, solid parenchymal tumors, and infectious or
inflammatory diseases. The less common plasma cell-type CD, mixed CD, and human
herpes virus-8-associated CD (HHV8-CD) are more prone to lead to generalized
(multicentric) adenopathy without the typical nodal hyperenhancement and are
associated with B symptoms and hematologic and immunologic manifestations. The
generalized forms of CD have a worse prognosis, which can approach that of
malignancies. CD has multiple known associations with neoplasms, skin diseases,
blood dyscrasias, and immunodeficiency, which include certain forms of lymphoma; 
paraneoplastic pemphigus; polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M
protein, and skin changes syndrome; and plasma cell dyscrasias. Cytokine
overproduction (IL-6) is an important pathogenetic factor in the development of
CD. The treatment is accordingly variable, from curative or diagnostic resection 
of a solitary lesion to systemic chemotherapy or anti-IL-6 therapy.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.sult.2013.12.005 
PMID: 24929266  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
