

2423. Oral Oncol. 2017 Oct;73:56-64. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2017.08.003. Epub 2017
Aug 12.

Genomic characterization of tobacco/nut chewing HPV-negative early stage tongue
tumors identify MMP10 asa candidate to predict metastases.

Upadhyay P(1), Gardi N(2), Desai S(1), Chandrani P(1), Joshi A(1), Dharavath
B(1), Arora P(3), Bal M(4), Nair S(3), Dutt A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Genomics Laboratory, ACTREC, Tata Memorial Centre, Navi Mumbai
410210, India; Homi Bhabha National Institute, Training School Complex, Anushakti
Nagar, Mumbai 400094, India.
(2)Integrated Genomics Laboratory, ACTREC, Tata Memorial Centre, Navi Mumbai
410210, India.
(3)Division of Head and Neck Oncology, Department of Surgical Oncology, Tata
Memorial Hospital, Tata Memorial Centre, Mumbai 400012, India.
(4)Department of Pathology, Tata Memorial Hospital, Tata Memorial Centre, Mumbai 
400012, India.
(5)Integrated Genomics Laboratory, ACTREC, Tata Memorial Centre, Navi Mumbai
410210, India; Homi Bhabha National Institute, Training School Complex, Anushakti
Nagar, Mumbai 400094, India. Electronic address: adutt@actrec.gov.in.

OBJECTIVES: Nodal metastases status among early stage tongue squamous cell cancer
patients plays a decisive role in the choice of treatment, wherein about 70%
patients can be spared from surgery with an accurate prediction of negative
pathological lymph node status. This underscores an unmet need for prognostic
biomarkers to stratify the patients who are likely to develop metastases.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We performed high throughput sequencing of fifty four
samples derived from HPV negative early stage tongue cancer patients habitual of 
chewing betel nuts, areca nuts, lime or tobacco using whole exome (n=47) and
transcriptome (n=17) sequencing that were analyzed using in-house computational
tools. Additionally, gene expression meta-analyses were carried out for 253
tongue cancer samples. The candidate genes were validated using qPCR and
immuno-histochemical analysis in an extended set of 50 early primary tongue
cancer samples.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: Somatic analysis revealed a classical tobacco mutational 
signature C:G>A:T transversion in 53% patients that were mutated in TP53, NOTCH1,
CDKN2A, HRAS, USP6, PIK3CA, CASP8, FAT1, APC, and JAK1. Similarly, significant
gains at genomic locus 11q13.3 (CCND1, FGF19, ORAOV1, FADD), 5p15.33 (SHANK2,
MMP16, TERT), and 8q24.3 (BOP1); and, losses at 5q22.2 (APC), 6q25.3 (GTF2H2) and
5q13.2 (SMN1) were observed in these samples. Furthermore, an integrated
gene-expression analysis of 253 tongue tumors suggested an upregulation of
metastases-related pathways and over-expression of MMP10 in 48% tumors that may
be crucial to predict nodal metastases in early tongue cancer patients. In
overall, we present the first descriptive portrait of somatic alterations
underlying the genome of tobacco/nut chewing HPV-negative early tongue cancer,
and identify MMP10 asa potential prognostic biomarker to stratify those likely to
develop metastases.

Copyright Â© 2017 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2017.08.003 
PMCID: PMC5628952
PMID: 28939077  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
