

2425. Cancer Immunol Res. 2013 Jul;1(1):54-63. doi: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-13-0034.

PD-L1 expression in the Merkel cell carcinoma microenvironment: association with 
inflammation, Merkel cell polyomavirus and overall survival.

Lipson EJ(#)(1), Vincent JG(#)(2), Loyo M(3), Kagohara LT(3), Luber BS(4), Wang
H(4), Xu H(5), Nayar SK(2), Wang TS(5), Sidransky D(3), Anders RA(2), Topalian
SL(6), Taube JM(2)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine and Sidney
Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Baltimore, Maryland 21287.
(2)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine and
Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Baltimore, Maryland 21287.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine and Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Baltimore,
Maryland 21287.
(4)Department of Oncology, Division of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine and Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Baltimore, Maryland 21287.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine and
Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Baltimore, Maryland 21287.
(6)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine and Sidney 
Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Baltimore, Maryland 21287.
(#)Contributed equally

Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is a lethal, virus-associated cancer that lacks
effective therapies for advanced disease. Agents blocking the PD-1/PD-L1 pathway 
have demonstrated objective, durable tumor regressions in patients with advanced 
solid malignancies and efficacy has been linked to PD-L1 expression in the tumor 
microenvironment. To investigate whether MCC might be a target for PD-1/PD-L1
blockade, we examined MCC PD-L1 expression, its association with
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs), Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCPyV), and
overall survival. Sixty-seven MCC specimens from 49 patients were assessed with
immunohistochemistry for PD-L1 expression by tumor cells and TILs, and immune
infiltrates were characterized phenotypically. Tumor cell and TIL PD-L1
expression were observed in 49% and 55% of patients, respectively. In specimens
with PD-L1(+) tumor cells, 97% (28/29) demonstrated a geographic association with
immune infiltrates. Among specimens with moderate-severe TIL intensities, 100%
(29/29) demonstrated PD-L1 expression by tumor cells. Significant associations
were also observed between the presence of MCPyV DNA, a brisk inflammatory
response, and tumor cell PD-L1 expression: MCPyV(-) tumor cells were uniformly
PD-L1(-). Taken together, these findings suggest that a local tumor-specific and 
potentially MCPyV-specific immune response drives tumor PD-L1 expression, similar
to previous observations in melanoma and head and neck squamous cell carcinomas. 
In multivariate analyses, PD-L1(-) MCCs were independently associated with worse 
overall survival (hazard ratio 3.12; 95% CI, 1.28-7.61; p=0.012). These findings 
suggest that an endogenous immune response promotes PD-L1 expression in the MCC
microenvironment when MCPyV is present, and provide a rationale for investigating
therapies blocking PD-1/PD-L1 for patients with MCC.

DOI: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-13-0034 
PMCID: PMC3885978
PMID: 24416729  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
