

2426. Int J Cancer. 2015 Jun 15;136(12):2940-8. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29344. Epub 2014 Nov
26.

A comprehensively characterized large panel of head and neck cancer
patient-derived xenografts identifies the mTOR inhibitor everolimus as potential 
new treatment option.

Klinghammer K(1), Raguse JD, Plath T, Albers AE, Joehrens K, Zakarneh A,
Brzezicha B, Wulf-Goldenberg A, Keilholz U, Hoffmann J, Fichtner I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Charité University Medicine, Berlin,
Germany; Department of Experimental Pharmacology, Max Delbrueck Center, Berlin,
Germany.

Patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models have shown to reflect original patient
tumors better than any other preclinical model. We embarked in a study
establishing a large panel of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas PDX for
biomarker analysis and evaluation of established and novel compounds. Out of 115 
transplanted specimens 52 models were established of which 29 were characterized 
for response to docetaxel, cetuximab, methotrexate, carboplatin, 5-fluorouracil
and everolimus. Further, tumors were subjected to sequencing analysis and gene
expression profiling of selected mTOR pathway members. Most frequent response was
observed for docetaxel and cetuximab. Responses to carboplatin, 5-fluorouracil
and methotrexate were moderate. Everolimus revealed activity in the majority of
PDX. Mutational profiling and gene expression analysis did not reveal a
predictive biomarker for everolimus even though by trend RPS6KB1 mRNA expression 
was associated with response. In conclusion we demonstrate a comprehensively
characterized panel of head and neck cancer PDX models, which represent a
valuable and renewable tissue resource for evaluation of novel compounds and
associated biomarkers.

© 2014 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.29344 
PMID: 25404014  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
