

2427. Radiographics. 2011 Oct;31(6):1793-807. doi: 10.1148/rg.316115502.

Castleman disease: the great mimic.

Bonekamp D(1), Horton KM, Hruban RH, Fishman EK.

Author information: 
(1)Russell H. Morgan Department of Radiology and Radiological Science, Johns
Hopkins School of Medicine, 601 N Caroline St, JHOC 3140C, Baltimore, MD 21287,
USA. dboneka1@jhmi.edu

Castleman disease is a nonclonal lymphoproliferative disorder and one of the more
common causes of nonneoplastic lymphadenopathy. Because of its diverse
manifestations and ability to affect any body region, Castleman disease is a
great mimic of both benign and malignant abnormalities in the neck, chest,
abdomen, and pelvis. Castleman disease most commonly manifests as unicentric
disease (unicentric Castleman disease) with a hyperenhancing lymph nodal mass and
should be considered in the differential diagnosis of lymphoma, metastatic
adenopathy, and infectious and/or inflammatory diseases that result in
adenopathy. Castleman disease includes a spectrum of pathologic variants,
including the classic hyaline vascular type, the less common plasma cell variant 
of Castleman disease, and the more recently described multicentric Castleman
disease and Castleman disease associated with human herpesvirus 8. Castleman
disease has been associated with the human immunodeficiency virus, lymphoma,
POEMS (polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M protein, and skin changes)
syndrome, paraneoplastic pemphigus, and plasma cell dyscrasias. Aggressive forms 
of Castleman disease with systemic manifestations may occur. Unicentric hyaline
vascular Castleman disease is often curable with surgery; however, multicentric
Castleman disease may require steroid treatment, chemotherapy, antiviral
medication, or the use of antiproliferative regimens because a surgical procedure
cannot be curative in this setting. Supplemental material available at
http://radiographics.rsna.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1148/rg.316115502/-/DC1.

Â© RSNA, 2011.

DOI: 10.1148/rg.316115502 
PMID: 21997995  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
