

2428. Cancer Med. 2015 Oct;4(10):1525-35. doi: 10.1002/cam4.499. Epub 2015 Jul 21.

Clinical relevance of copy number profiling in oral and oropharyngeal squamous
cell carcinoma.

van Kempen PM(1), Noorlag R(2), Braunius WW(1), Moelans CB(3), Rifi W(4), Savola 
S(4), Koole R(2), Grolman W(1), van Es RJ(2), Willems SM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,
The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, University Medical Center
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.
(4)Tumor diagnostics, MRC-Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Current conventional treatment modalities in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) are nonselective and have shown to cause serious side effects. 
Unraveling the molecular profiles of head and neck cancer may enable promising
clinical applications that pave the road for personalized cancer treatment. We
examined copy number status in 36 common oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes in 
a cohort of 191 oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas (OPSCC) and 164 oral
cavity squamous cell carcinomas (OSCC) using multiplex ligation probe
amplification. Copy number status was correlated with human papillomavirus (HPV) 
status in OPSCC, with occult lymph node status in OSCC and with patient survival.
The 11q13 region showed gain or amplifications in 59% of HPV-negative OPSCC,
whereas this amplification was almost absent in HPV-positive OPSCC. Additionally,
in clinically lymph node-negative OSCC (Stage I-II), gain of the 11q13 region was
significantly correlated with occult lymph node metastases with a negative
predictive value of 81%. Multivariate survival analysis revealed a significantly 
decreased disease-free survival in both HPV-negative and HPV-positive OPSCC with 
a gain of Wnt-induced secreted protein-1. Gain of CCND1 showed to be an
independent predictor for worse survival in OSCC. These results show that copy
number aberrations, mainly of the 11q13 region, may be important predictors and
prognosticators which allow for stratifying patients for personalized treatment
of HNSCC.

Â© 2015 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cam4.499 
PMCID: PMC4618623
PMID: 26194878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
