

2436. Acta Neuropathol. 2013 Oct;126(4):575-94. doi: 10.1007/s00401-013-1165-y. Epub
2013 Aug 18.

Integrative genetic, epigenetic and pathological analysis of paraganglioma
reveals complex dysregulation of NOTCH signaling.

Cama A(1), Verginelli F, Lotti LV, Napolitano F, Morgano A, D'Orazio A, Vacca M, 
Perconti S, Pepe F, Romani F, Vitullo F, di Lella F, Visone R, Mannelli M,
Neumann HP, Raiconi G, Paties C, Moschetta A, Tagliaferri R, Veronese A, Sanna M,
Mariani-Costantini R.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of General Pathology, Aging Research Center (Ce.S.I.), G. d'Annunzio
University Foundation, Via Colle dell'Ara, 66100, Chieti, Italy.

Head and neck paragangliomas, rare neoplasms of the paraganglia composed of nests
of neurosecretory and glial cells embedded in vascular stroma, provide a
remarkable example of organoid tumor architecture. To identify genes and pathways
commonly deregulated in head and neck paraganglioma, we integrated high-density
genome-wide copy number variation (CNV) analysis with microRNA and
immunomorphological studies. Gene-centric CNV analysis of 24 cases identified a
list of 104 genes most significantly targeted by tumor-associated alterations.
The "NOTCH signaling pathway" was the most significantly enriched term in the
list (P = 0.002 after Bonferroni or Benjamini correction). Expression of the
relevant NOTCH pathway proteins in sustentacular (glial), chief (neuroendocrine) 
and endothelial cells was confirmed by immunohistochemistry in 47 head and neck
paraganglioma cases. There were no relationships between level and pattern of
NOTCH1/JAG2 protein expression and germline mutation status in the SDH genes,
implicated in paraganglioma predisposition, or the presence/absence of
immunostaining for SDHB, a surrogate marker of SDH mutations. Interestingly,
NOTCH upregulation was observed also in cases with no evidence of CNVs at NOTCH
signaling genes, suggesting altered epigenetic modulation of this pathway. To
address this issue we performed microarray-based microRNA expression analyses.
Notably 5 microRNAs (miR-200a,b,c and miR-34b,c), including those most
downregulated in the tumors, correlated to NOTCH signaling and directly targeted 
NOTCH1 in in vitro experiments using SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells. Furthermore,
lentiviral transduction of miR-200s and miR-34s in patient-derived primary
tympano-jugular paraganglioma cell cultures was associated with NOTCH1
downregulation and increased levels of markers of cell toxicity and cell death.
Taken together, our results provide an integrated view of common molecular
alterations associated with head and neck paraganglioma and reveal an essential
role of NOTCH pathway deregulation in this tumor type.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-013-1165-y 
PMCID: PMC3789891
PMID: 23955600  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
