

2443. Otolaryngol Pol. 2013 May-Jun;67(3):113-34. doi: 10.1016/j.otpol.2013.01.003.
Epub 2013 Jan 11.

Recommendations for the diagnosis of human papilloma virus (HPV) high and low
risk in the prevention and treatment of diseases of the oral cavity, pharynx and 
larynx. Guide of experts PTORL and KIDL.

Wierzbicka M(1), Józefiak A, Szydłowski J, Marszałek A, Stankiewicz C,
Hassman-Poznańska E, Osuch-Wójcikiewicz E, Składzień J, Klatka J, Pietruszewska
W, Puacz E, Szyfter K, Szyfter W.

Author information: 
(1)Klinika Otolaryngologii i Onkologii Laryngologicznej UM w Poznaniu, ul.
Przybyszewskiego 49, 60-355 Poznań, Poland. gowierzb@yahoo.co.uk

The role of human papilloma viruses (HPV) in malignant and nonmalignant ENT
diseases and the corresponding epidemiological burden has been widely described. 
International head and neck oncology community discussed growing evidence that
oral HPV infection contributes to the risk of oro-pharyngeal carcinoma (OPC) and 
recommended HPV testing as a part of the work up for patients with OPC. Polish
Society of ENT Head Neck Surgery and National Chamber of Laboratory
Diagnosticians have worked together to define the minimum requirements for
assigning a diagnosis of HPV-related conditions and testing strategy that include
HPV specific tests in our country. This paper briefly frames the literature
information concerning low risk (LR) and high risk (HR) HPV, reviews the
epidemiology, general guidance on the most appropriate biomarkers for clinical
assessment of HPV. The definition of HPV-related cancer was presented. The
article is aiming to highlight some of major issues for the clinician dealing
with patients with HPV-related morbidities and to introduce the diagnostic
algorithm in Poland.

Copyright © 2013 Polish Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery Society.
Published by Elsevier Urban & Partner Sp. z.o.o. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.otpol.2013.01.003 
PMID: 23719268  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
