

2444. Vaccine. 2014 Feb 26;32(10):1169-73. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2013.11.048. Epub
2013 Dec 2.

Antibody response to human papillomavirus vaccine in subjects with inherited bone
marrow failure syndromes.

Alter BP(1), Giri N(2), Pan Y(3), Savage SA(2), Pinto LA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Genetics Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics,
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD 20852,
USA. Electronic address: alterb@mail.nih.gov.
(2)Clinical Genetics Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics,
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD 20852,
USA.
(3)HPV Immunology Laboratory, Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, 
Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

Patients with Fanconi anemia (FA) and other inherited bone marrow failure
syndromes (IBMFS) have extremely high risks of squamous cell head and neck, and
gynecologic carcinomas. In the general population, these sites are often
associated with infection with human papillomaviruses (HPV), particularly HPV16
and HPV18. Our objectives were to measure the levels of HPV antibodies in
unvaccinated patients, and to determine whether these patients developed and
maintained similar levels of antibodies as those observed in healthy women,
following vaccination with the currently licensed HPV L1 virus-like particles
(VLP) vaccines. We measured anti-HPV IgG antibody levels in sera from patients
using an HPV16 or HPV18 L1 VLP enzyme-linked immunoabsorbent assay. Most
unvaccinated patients did not have detectable antibody levels, except for a few
women above age 25. Both FA and other IBMFS patients developed antibody levels
following vaccination that were similar to those previously described in healthy 
women, and those levels appeared to be sustained out to 5 years after
immunization. Thus, antibody responses to the HPV L1 VLP vaccine in patients with
FA and other IBMFS appeared to be similar to the responses reported in the
general population, implying potential efficacy against future infections with
the HPV types contained in the vaccine.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2013.11.048 
PMCID: PMC3944909
PMID: 24295807  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
