

2452. Mayo Clin Proc. 2016 Mar;91(3):386-96. doi: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2015.12.017.

Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma: Update on Epidemiology, Diagnosis, and
Treatment.

Marur S(1), Forastiere AA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University and the Sidney Kimmel
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Baltimore, MD. Electronic address: smarur1@jhmi.edu.
(2)Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University and the Sidney Kimmel
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Baltimore, MD.

Squamous cell carcinoma arises from multiple anatomic subsites in the head and
neck region. The risk factors for development of cancers of the oral cavity,
oropharynx, hypopharynx, and larynx include tobacco exposure and alcohol
dependence, and infection with oncogenic viruses is associated with cancers
developing in the nasopharynx, palatine, and lingual tonsils of the oropharynx.
The incidence of human papillomavirus-associated oropharyngeal cancer is
increasing in developed countries, and by 2020, the annual incidence could
surpass that of cervical cancer. The treatment for early-stage squamous cell
cancers of the head and neck is generally single modality, either surgery or
radiotherapy. The treatment for locally advanced head and neck cancers is
multimodal, with either surgery followed by adjuvant radiation or chemoradiation 
as indicated by pathologic features or definitive chemoradiation. For recurrent
disease that is not amenable to a salvage local or regional approach and for
metastatic disease, chemotherapy with or without a biological agent is indicated.
To date, molecular testing has not influenced treatment selection in head and
neck cancer. This review will focus on the changing epidemiology, advances in
diagnosis, and treatment options for squamous cell cancers of the head and neck, 
along with data on risk stratification specific to oropharyngeal cancer, and will
highlight the direction of current trials.

Copyright Â© 2016 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2015.12.017 
PMID: 26944243  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
