

2456. J Biol Chem. 2012 Nov 9;287(46):38946-55. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.380121. Epub 2012
Sep 27.

The neck region of the C-type lectin DC-SIGN regulates its surface spatiotemporal
organization and virus-binding capacity on antigen-presenting cells.

Manzo C(1), Torreno-Pina JA, Joosten B, Reinieren-Beeren I, Gualda EJ,
Loza-Alvarez P, Figdor CG, Garcia-Parajo MF, Cambi A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Ciencies Fotoniques, Mediterranean Technology Park, 08860
Castelldefels (Barcelona), Spain.

The C-type lectin DC-SIGN expressed on dendritic cells (DCs) facilitates capture 
and internalization of a plethora of different pathogens. Although it is known
that DC-SIGN organizes in nanoclusters at the surface of DCs, the molecular
mechanisms responsible for this well defined nanopatterning and role in viral
binding remain enigmatic. By combining biochemical and advanced biophysical
techniques, including optical superresolution and single particle tracking, we
demonstrate that DC-SIGN intrinsic nanoclustering strictly depends on its
molecular structure. DC-SIGN nanoclusters exhibited free, Brownian diffusion on
the cell membrane. Truncation of the extracellular neck region, known to abrogate
tetramerization, significantly reduced nanoclustering and concomitantly increased
lateral diffusion. Importantly, DC-SIGN nanocluster dissolution exclusively
compromised binding to nanoscale size pathogens. Monte Carlo simulations revealed
that heterogeneity on nanocluster density and spatial distribution confers
broader binding capabilities to DC-SIGN. As such, our results underscore a direct
relationship between spatial nanopatterning, driven by intermolecular
interactions between the neck regions, and receptor diffusion to provide DC-SIGN 
with the exquisite ability to dock pathogens at the virus length scale. Insight
into how virus receptors are organized prior to virus binding and how they
assemble into functional platforms for virus docking is helpful to develop novel 
strategies to prevent virus entry and infection.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.380121 
PMCID: PMC3493935
PMID: 23019323  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
