

2463. Am J Med Sci. 2010 Feb;339(2):185-7. doi: 10.1097/MAJ.0b013e3181bcc633.

Case report of human immunodeficiency virus infection, Hodgkin lymphoma, and
pregnancy.

Israel R(1), Dorer R, Aboulafia DM.

Author information: 
(1)Virginia Mason Clinic, University of Washington, Seattle, 98111-0900, USA.

As the incidence of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection in women of
child bearing age continues to increase in the era of highly active
antiretroviral therapy and Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) is the most common non-acquired 
immunodeficiency syndrome defining malignancy, we anticipate that the number of
cases of HIV-associated HL in pregnant women will increase in the near future.
Herein, we describe the case of a pregnant 30-year-old HIV-infected Ethiopian
woman with a CD4 count of 254 cells/microL and an HIV viral load of 1200
copies/mL who presented to medical attention with progressive neck adenopathy.
Subsequent histopathology and radiographic findings revealed clinical stage IIIA 
Classical HL. After a spontaneous miscarriage of 10 weeks into her pregnancy, the
patient began highly active antiretroviral therapy and chemotherapy. Thirty
months later, she remained in complete remission. Through a literature review, we
identified 2 additional case reports involving HIV, HL and pregnancy. One patient
received 3 cycles of chemotherapy, refused further treatment, delivered an
HIV-seropositive girl, and died shortly after from complications of presumed
pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia. The second patient received both active
antiretroviral therapy and chemotherapy, delivered an HIV-seronegative boy, and
remained in complete remission at 9 months follow-up. We conclude by offering
recommendations for the staging and treatment of pregnant, HIV-infected patients 
with HL.

DOI: 10.1097/MAJ.0b013e3181bcc633 
PMID: 20019583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
