

2467. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2018 Sep 8;47(9):682-686. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0529-5807.2018.09.006.

[Significance of HPV and cell cycle related proteins in basaloid squamous cell
carcinoma of the larynx].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Cui LF(1), Chang H, Zhao HY, Qu CL, Gao Y, Liu HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Beijing Shijitan Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing 100038, China.

Objective: To study the significance of HPV and cell cycle related proteins in
basaloid squamous cell carcinoma (BSCC) of the larynx. Methods: Twenty-nine cases
of laryngeal BSCC from Beijing Tongren Hospital from January 2005 to December
2011 were reviewed. HPV typing by polymerase chain reaction-reverse dot blot
(PCR-RDB) and p53, Ki-67, p16, p21 and cyclin D1 expression by
immunohistochemistry were performed. The relationship between these indicators,
various pathologic parameters (TNM, tumor size, tumor site and lymph node
metastasis) and HPV status was analyzed. Results: There were 27 male and 2 female
patients. The median age was 62 years. Lymph node metastasis and supraglottic
tumor location were slightly higher than that of "usual" SCC, but not
statistically significant (P>0.05). HPV DNA was detected in 27.6% (8/29) of the
laryngeal BSCC, and all were HPV16. The expression of HPV was not related to age,
alcohol consumption, tumor stage and tumor size. p53 was expressed in 31.0%(9/29)
of laryngeal BSCC, and these cases were more likely supraglottic and had lymph
node metastases (P<0.05). p16 staining was seen in 24.1% (7/29) of laryngeal
BSCC, and these cases showed slightly higher rate of lymph node metastasis
compared to p16 negative cases. The expression rates of p21 and cyclinD1 were
27.6% (8/29) and 69.0%(20/29), respectively, which were not related to age, tumor
size, stage, lymph node metastasis, smoking and drinking. There were only 3 p16+ 
/HPV+ cases, which showed higher p21 and Ki-67 index compared to the HPV negative
group (P<0.05). Conclusion: Some laryngeal BSCC expresses HPV DNA, possibly
indicating an association with HPV; but p16 expression is not a reliable
indicator for HPV infection.

Publisher: 目的： 研究喉基底样鳞状细胞癌(basaloid squamous cell carcinoma,
BSCC)中人乳头状瘤病毒(HPV)及细胞周期相关蛋白的表达及意义。 方法：
收集北京同仁医院2005年1月至2011年12月332例喉鳞状细胞癌(SCC)病理资料，包括303例普通型SCC及29例喉BSCC，回顾性分析其中29例喉BSCC
(8.7%)临床病理学特点，采用聚合酶链反应(PCR)反向点杂交方法检测HPV
DNA，免疫组织化学SP法染色观察细胞周期相关蛋白p53、Ki-67、p16、p21、cyclin
D1的表达，比较分析以上指标与肿瘤大小、分期、部位、淋巴结转移等主要病理学特点的关系，初步探讨HPV与细胞周期相关蛋白之间的相关性。 结果：
(1)29例喉BSCC男性27例，女性2例，年龄46～82岁(中位年龄62岁)，与普通型SCC相比，发病年龄、淋巴结转移个数、淋巴结转移率及声门上肿瘤的发生率略高
，但差异无统计学意义(P>0.05)。(2)喉BSCC中27.6%(8/29)检测到HPV
DNA，且均为HPV16，HPV的表达与年龄、是否饮酒及分期、肿瘤大小等无关(P>0.05)。(3)31.0%(9/29)的喉BSCC表达p53，且p53阳性病例
更容易发生于声门上并伴有淋巴结转移(P<0.05)。p16的阳性表达率为24.1%(7/29)，其淋巴结转移率略高于p16阴性病例，p21、cyclin
D1的表达率分别为27.6%(8/29)和69.0%
(20/29)，与年龄、肿瘤大小、分期、淋巴结转移、是否吸烟、饮酒等均无相关性(P>0.05)。(4)8例HPV阳性的BSCC只有3例p16阳性，HPV阳性组p2
1及Ki-67阳性指数比HPV阴性组增高(P<0.05)。 结论： 部分喉BSCC表达HPV，个别病例可能为HPV相关性喉BSCC，p16表达并不是喉BSCC
HPV感染的可靠替代性指标。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.issn.0529-5807.2018.09.006 
PMID: 30220121  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
