

2476. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Apr 15;18(8):2278-89. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-1593.
Epub 2012 Feb 20.

Tumor epidermal growth factor receptor and EGFR PY1068 are independent prognostic
indicators for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Wheeler S(1), Siwak DR, Chai R, LaValle C, Seethala RR, Wang L, Cieply K, Sherer 
C, Joy C, Mills GB, Argiris A, Siegfried JM, Grandis JR, Egloff AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

PURPOSE: To assess the prognostic value of epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) molecular characteristics of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: HNSCC tumors from patients prospectively enrolled in either
an Early Detection Research Network (EDRN) study and treated with surgery without
an EGFR-targeted agent (N = 154) or enrolled in a chemoradiation trial involving 
the EGFR-targeted antibody cetuximab (N = 39) were evaluated for EGFR gene
amplification by FISH and EGFR protein by immunohistochemical staining.
Fresh-frozen tumors (EDRN) were also evaluated for EGFR protein and site-specific
phosphorylation at Y992 and Y1068 using reverse-phase protein array (n = 67).
Tumor (n = 50) EGFR and EGFRvIII mRNA levels were quantified using real-time PCR.
RESULTS: EGFR expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC) was significantly higher
in the EDRN tumors with EGFR gene amplification (P < 0.001), and a similar trend 
was noted in the cetuximab-treated cohort. In the EDRN and cetuximab-treated
cohorts elevated EGFR by IHC was associated with reduced survival (P = 0.019 and 
P = 0.06, respectively). Elevated expression of total EGFR and EGFR PY1068 were
independently significantly associated with reduced progression-free survival in 
the EDRN cohort [HR = 2.75; 95% confidence interval (CI) = 1.26-6.00 and HR =
3.29; 95% CI = 1.34-8.14, respectively].
CONCLUSIONS: In two independent HNSCC cohorts treated with or without cetuximab, 
tumor EGFR levels were indicative of survival. Tumor EGFR PY1068 levels provided 
prognostic information independent of total EGFR.

Â©2012 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-1593 
PMCID: PMC3430124
PMID: 22351687  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
