

2478. Oncol Rep. 2010 Jul;24(1):225-31.

Toll-like receptor 3 signaling induces apoptosis in human head and neck cancer
via survivin associated pathway.

Nomi N(1), Kodama S, Suzuki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Oita University Faculty of Medicine, Yufu, Oita 
879-5593, Japan.

The innate immune system builds up host defense against a huge diversity of
pathogens, such as viruses, bacteria and fungi. Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are
one of the pattern recognition receptors that trigger the initiation of various
defense mechanisms. The expression of TLRs represents an important link between
innate and adaptive immune responses. The expression of TLRs in several cancer
cell types has been reported; however, the exact roles they play in cancers are
still unclear. In this study, we investigated the expression and signaling of
TLRs in human head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs). The expression of 
TLRs in 8 HNSCC cell lines was examined by Western blot analysis and flow
cytometry. The expression of TLR mRNA was also examined by quantitative RT-PCR.
Cells were incubated with poly I:C, a TLR3 ligand, and cell viability was tested 
by MTT assay. In addition, apoptosis was analyzed by flow cytometry with Annexin 
V and propidium iodide staining. The expression of survivin, a member of the
inhibitors of the apoptosis protein family, was also investigated. TLR2 and TLR3 
were widely expressed in human HNSCCs. Interestingly, the stimulation of TLR3 by 
poly I:C induced apoptosis in cancer cells in a dose-dependent manner. The
expression of survivin was down-regulated during apoptosis, suggesting that TLR
signaling affects survivin-mediated signal transduction in apoptosis. In the
present study, we demonstrated the proapoptotic activity of TLR3 expressed by
HNSCCs. These results suggest that TLR3 could be a new target for therapy in
HNSCCs.


PMID: 20514466  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
