

2479. Cancer Immunol Res. 2015 Jan;3(1):12-7. doi: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-14-0205.

Immunity in head and neck cancer.

Schoenfeld JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts. jdschoenfeld@partners.org.

Head and neck cancers are a diverse group of malignancies that includes an
increasing number of virally mediated cancers in addition to tumors caused by
tobacco and alcohol use. In both cases, tumor development is intimately related
to the host immune system, and the status of an endogenous antitumor response is 
likely prognostic. Virally mediated cancers provide unique targets for preventive
vaccines that generate immune responses directed against virus-associated
antigens. Once head and neck tumors develop, they are commonly treated with
surgery, radiotherapy, and/or chemotherapy. These treatments are associated with 
significant toxicities, and despite this, subgroups of patients respond poorly
and are likely to relapse and die of their disease. Tumor immunotherapy may allow
for improvements in both treatment-associated toxicity and outcome. In addition
to providing specific targets for therapeutic vaccines and adoptive therapy,
virally associated cancers may also be particularly dependent on immune
checkpoints; therefore, immune checkpoint inhibitors are being actively tested
for these diseases. Cancers that are not virally mediated may also respond to
immunotherapies, and biomarkers that could predict response to immunotherapy
irrespective of viral status are being evaluated. Multiple ongoing studies are
testing benefits of immunotherapy in the management of metastatic squamous cell
carcinoma of the head and neck. Early promising results pave the way for future
studies that will expand testing to nonmetastatic diseases and other types of
head and neck cancers. Prospects of combining various immunotherapies and more
established treatments such as chemotherapy and radiotherapy are very intriguing 
and may provide synergistic benefits.

Â©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-14-0205 
PMID: 25568068  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
