

2482. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 2010 Aug;49(8):649-52.

[The impact of highly active antiretroviral therapy on bone mineral density in
human immunodeficiency virus infected patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Guo FP(1), Yu XB, Luo L, Han Y, Qiu ZF, Zuo LY, Li YL, Yu W, Li TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital,
Peking Union Medical College, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing
100730, China.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the influence of highly active antiretroviral therapy
(HAART)on bone mineral density(BMD) of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
infected patients and correlating clinical factors.
METHODS: The clinical data from 2007 to 2008 were analyzed, including 50 patients
treated with HAART (named treated group), 12 HIV-infected antiretroviral-naive
patients (named untreated group) and 20 healthy people (named control group).
Lumbar, femoral neck, femur, femoral greater trochanter and whole body BMD were
measured by dual energy X-ray absorptiometry. The data were respectively
analyzed.
RESULTS: There were 19(38.0%) patients with osteopenia and 1 (2.0%) patient with 
osteoporosis in the treated group. There were 6 (50.0%) patients with osteopenia 
and 2 (16.7%) patient with osteoporosis in the untreated group. There were 5
(25.0%) patients with osteopenia, no one with osteoporosis in the control group. 
The prevalence of osteopenia/osteoporosis was statistically higher in the
untreated group than that in the control group (P=0.02). The BMD of femur,
femoral neck and greater trochanter [(0.97±0.14), (0.91±0.13), (0.76±0.12) g/cm2]
in the HIV-infected group (including the treated and untreated group) were
significantly lower than that in the control group [(1.04±0.12), (0.98±0.14),
(0.84 ± 0.11) g/cm2, P<0.05]. There were no significantly differences in the BMD 
between the untreated group and the treated group. In the treated group,
osteopenia/osteoporosis correlated with body weight less than 60 kg (r=0.074,
P=0.004) and the viral load before HAART (r=5.103, P=0.021).
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of osteopenia and osteoporosis in
antiretroviral-naive HIV-infected patients is higher. The BMD of HIV-infected
patients are reduced compared with the healthy people. The BMD is similar among
HIV-infected patients irrespective of antiretroviral treatment. Body weight less 
than 60 kg and the viral load before HAART are the risk factors of
osteopenia/osteoporosis for the HIV-infected antiretroviral patients.


PMID: 20979781  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
