

2483. Mol Cancer Ther. 2013 Oct;12(10):1994-2005. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0206.
Epub 2013 Jul 19.

The dual pathway inhibitor rigosertib is effective in direct patient tumor
xenografts of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas.

Anderson RT(1), Keysar SB, Bowles DW, Glogowska MJ, Astling DP, Morton JJ, Le P, 
Umpierrez A, Eagles-Soukup J, Gan GN, Vogler BW, Sehrt D, Takimoto SM, Aisner DL,
Wilhelm F, Frederick BA, Varella-Garcia M, Tan AC, Jimeno A.

Author information: 
(1)Corresponding Author: Antonio Jimeno, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, MS8117, 12801 East 17th Avenue, Room L18-8101B, Aurora, CO 80045.
Antonio.Jimeno@ucdenver.edu.

The dual pathway inhibitor rigosertib inhibits phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)
pathway activation as well as polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) activity across a broad
spectrum of cancer cell lines. The importance of PIK3CA alterations in squamous
cell carcinoma of the head and neck (HNSCC) has raised interest in exploring
agents targeting PI3K, the product of PIK3CA. The genetic and molecular basis of 
rigosertib treatment response was investigated in a panel of 16 HNSCC cell lines,
and direct patient tumor xenografts from eight patients with HNSCC [four
HPV-serotype16 (HPV16)-positive]. HNSCC cell lines and xenografts were
characterized by pathway enrichment gene expression analysis, exon sequencing,
gene copy number, Western blotting, and immunohistochemistry (IHC). Rigosertib
had potent antiproliferative effects on 11 of 16 HPV(-) HNSCC cell lines.
Treatment sensitivity was confirmed in two cell lines using an orthotopic in vivo
xenograft model. Growth reduction after rigosertib treatment was observed in
three of eight HNSCC direct patient tumor lines. The responsive tumor lines
carried a combination of a PI3KCA-activating event (amplification or mutation)
and a p53-inactivating event (either HPV16- or mutation-mediated TP53
inactivation). In this study, we evaluated the in vitro and in vivo efficacy of
rigosertib in both HPV(+) and HPV(-) HNSCCs, focusing on inhibition of the PI3K
pathway. Although consistent inhibition of the PI3K pathway was not evident in
HNSCC, we identified a combination of PI3K/TP53 events necessary, but not
sufficient, for rigosertib sensitivity.

Â©2013 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0206 
PMCID: PMC3796006
PMID: 23873848  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
