

2485. Oncol Rep. 2013 May;29(5):1777-84. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2340. Epub 2013 Mar 11.

ALDH1-positive cancer stem-like cells are enriched in nodal metastases of
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma independent of HPV status.

Qian X(1), Wagner S, Ma C, Klussmann JP, Hummel M, Kaufmann AM, Albers AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Berlin, Germany.

Oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is caused by high-risk (HR) human
papillomavirus (HPV) or alcohol and tobacco abuse. Aldehyde dehydrogenase 1
(ALDH1) is a confirmed marker for cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) of OSCC
responsible for therapy resistance, recurrence and metastasis. Associations
between HR-HPV/p16, CSC frequency and clinicopathological parameters in patients 
with metastatic OSCC were investigated. In the present study, HPV genotypes and
expression of ALDH1 and p16 was analyzed in 40 paired OSCC and metastases. A
significant correlation between ALDH1 positivity with lower primary tumor
differentiation grade (P=0.009) and higher nodal status (P=0.015) was noted.
Compared to primary tumors, the proportion of ALDH1-expressing cells was
significantly increased in metastases (P=0.012), while significantly fewer
ALDH1-expressing cells were found in HR-HPV-DNA⁺/p16⁺ primary tumors (P=0.038)
compared to HR-HPV-DNA⁻/p16⁻ primary tumors. Metastases showed no difference.
ALDH1⁺ CSCs are detectable in OSCC and metastases. ALDH1 high-grade OSCC exhibits
a more aggressive phenotype characterized by higher nodal classification and
lower differentiation. This suggests a subpopulation contained in the
ALDH1-positive OSCC cell pool able to complete the metastatic cascade and
subsequently enriching in metastasis independent of tumor etiology and ALDH1
content.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2013.2340 
PMID: 23483187  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
