

2490. Semin Radiat Oncol. 2012 Apr;22(2):108-18. doi: 10.1016/j.semradonc.2011.12.002.

Predicting recurrence after radiotherapy in head and neck cancer.

Begg AC(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. a.begg@nki.nl

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most common cancer
worldwide. Radiotherapy is a mainstay of treatment, either alone for early stage 
tumors or combined with chemotherapy for late stage tumors. An overall 5-year
survival rate of around 50% for HNSCC demonstrates that treatment is often
unsuccessful. Prediction of outcome is, therefore, aimed at sparing patients from
ineffective and toxic treatments on the one hand, and indicating more successful 
treatment modalities on the other. Both functional and genetic assays have been
developed to predict intrinsic radiosensitivity, hypoxia, and repopulation rate. 
Few, however, have shown consistent correlations with outcome across multiple
studies. Messenger RNA and microRNA profiling show promise for predicting
hypoxia, whereas epidermal growth factor receptor expression combined with other 
measures of tumor differentiation grade shows promise for predicting repopulation
rate. Intrinsic radiosensitivity assays have not proven useful to date, although 
development of repair protein foci assays indicates promise from preclinical
studies. Assays for cancer stem cell content have shown promise in several
clinical studies. In addition, 2 assays showing robustness as predictors for
outcome in HNSCC are human papilloma virus status and epidermal growth factor
receptor expression. Neither these nor stem cell assays, however, can as yet
reliably indicate alternative and better treatments for poor prognosis patients. 
It would be of great value to have assays that predict the benefit for an
individual from combining new molecularly targeted agents with radiotherapy to
increase response, in particular those that exploit tumor mutations to provide
tumor specificity. Predictive assays are being developed for detecting defects in
repair pathways for single- and double-strand DNA breaks, which should allow
selection of drugs targeting the appropriate backup pathway, thus exploiting the 
concept of synthetic lethality. This is one of the most promising areas for
prediction, both currently and in the future.

Copyright Â© 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semradonc.2011.12.002 
PMID: 22385918  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
