

2492. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2015 Nov;37(8):e475-80. doi:
10.1097/MPH.0000000000000368.

Cytotoxic Molecule-positive Epstein-Barr Virus-associated Peripheral T-cell
Lymphoma in a 20-Month-old Child: A Case Report and Review of the Literature.

Zhang H(1), Kheradpour A, Rowsell EH, Zuppan CW, Weiss LM, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine †Pediatric Hematology and
Oncology, Loma Linda University Medical Center, Loma Linda ‡Clarient Diagnostic
Inc., Aliso Viejo, CA.

Peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL) is rare in children. Expression of cytotoxic
molecules (CM) in nodal PTCL has unique clinicopathologic features, including an 
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) association. However, CM+, EBV-associated PTCL is
extremely rare in the childhood, with only 1 study having been reported to date, 
including both pediatric and adult patients. We report a case of CM+ PTCL in a
20-month-old boy with left neck lymphadenopathy as well as multiple visceral
lesions. A biopsied lymph node was diffusely infiltrated by atypical lymphoid
cells with a CD4/CD8, granzyme B+, perforin+, and TIA-1+ phenotype, and EBV
positivity by in situ hybridization. Rearrangements of the TCR γ-chain and
β-chain genes were demonstrated by polymerase chain reaction. Ancillary genetic
studies detected trisomy 2, trisomy 10, a structurally abnormal 6p, and
additional copies of the IRF4 gene. Multiple bone marrow biopsies failed to show 
any evidence of tumor, histiocytic hyperplasia, or hemophagocytosis. This lesion 
was therefore diagnosed as "CM+, EBV-associated high-grade peripheral T-cell
lymphoma." After 5 cycles of chemotherapy, the patient was in remission 8 months 
following initial diagnosis. To our knowledge, this represents the youngest child
with this rare tumor in the published literature, and showing an unusually
favorable initial response to therapy.

DOI: 10.1097/MPH.0000000000000368 
PMID: 26056791  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
