

2494. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2018 Apr;124:11-20. doi:
10.1016/j.critrevonc.2018.02.006. Epub 2018 Feb 7.

p16(INK4a) status and survival benefit of EGFR inhibitors in head and neck
squamous cell cancer: A systematic review and meta-analysis.

Su Y(1), Cui J(1), Xu D(1), Wang M(1), Xu T(2), Tian H(1), Han F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, The First Hospital of Jilin University, 71 Xinmin Ave,
Changchun, China.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, The First Hospital of Jilin University, 71
Xinmin Ave, Changchun, China.
(3)Cancer Center, The First Hospital of Jilin University, 71 Xinmin Ave,
Changchun, China. Electronic address: fujun_han@aliyun.com.

BACKGROUND: We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis to investigate the
impact of p16(INK4a) status on survival benefits in head and neck squamous cell
cancer (HNSCC) after anti-epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) based
treatments.
METHODS: We identified studies assessing anti-EGFR based versus non-anti-EGFR
based regimens in patients with unresectable locoregionally advanced, recurrent
or metastatic HNSCC. The primary endpoint was progression-free survival (PFS). We
assessed the risk of bias in each included study. Random-effects models were used
to estimate the efficacy of anti-EGFR based treatments for the
p16-positive/p16-negative patients and prespecified subgroups defined by
treatment modalities (chemotherapy or radiotherapy).
RESULTS: Ten studies with 1929 patients were included. Adding an EGFR inhibitor
did not significantly improve PFS or overall survival (OS) in either p16-negative
or p16-positive disease. Subgroup analyses suggested a significant PFS benefit
(hazard ratio [HR] 0.58; P < 0.001) of adding an EGFR inhibitor to chemotherapy
versus chemotherapy for p16-negative disease. The p16-negativity was also
associated with a significant OS benefit (HR 0.77; P = 0.003) when studies with
high risk of bias were excluded. In contrast, adding an EGFR inhibitor to
chemotherapy provided no benefit in either PFS or OS for p16-positive disease. No
benefit was shown in either PFS or OS from adding an EGFR inhibitor to
radiotherapy or chemoradiotherapy versus chemoradiotherapy regardless of p16
status.
CONCLUSIONS: For the first time, our meta-analysis provides evidence that
efficacy of anti-EGFR based treatments could be dependent on both p16 status and 
treatment modality. p16 status is likely to have a role in predicting survival to
anti-EGFR based treatments in recurrent or metastatic HNSCC.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2018.02.006 
PMID: 29548481  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
