

2498. Virol J. 2013 Apr 16;10:119. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-10-119.

Consistent high concentration of the viral microRNA BART17 in plasma samples from
nasopharyngeal carcinoma patients--evidence of non-exosomal transport.

Gourzones C(1), Ferrand FR, Amiel C, Vérillaud B, Barat A, Guérin M, Gattolliat
CH, Gelin A, Klibi J, Chaaben AB, Schneider V, Guemira F, Guigay J, Lang P,
Jimenez-Pailhes AS, Busson P.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS-UMR 8126 and Institut de Cancérologie Gustave Roussy, Université
Paris-Sud 11, 39 Rue Camille Desmoulins, Villejuif 94805, France.

BACKGROUND: Because latent Epstein Barr (EBV)-infection is a specific
characteristic of malignant nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC), various molecules of 
viral origin are obvious candidate biomarkers in this disease. In a previous
study, we could show in a few clinical samples that it was possible to detect a
category of EBV microRNAs called miR-BARTs in the plasma of at least a fraction
of NPC patients. The first aim of the present study was to investigate the status
of circulating miR-BART17-5p (one of the miR-BARTs hereafter called miR-BART17)
and EBV DNA in a larger series of NPC plasma samples. The second aim was to
determine whether or not circulating miR-BART17 was carried by plasma exosomes.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Plasma samples were collected from 26 NPC patients and 10
control donors, including 9 patients with non-NPC Head and Neck squamous cell
carcinoma and one healthy EBV carrier. Concentrations of miR-BART17 and two
cellular microRNAs (hsa-miR-16 and -146a) were assessed by real-time quantitative
PCR with spike-in normalization and absolute quantification. In addition, for 2
patients, exosome distributions of miR-BART17 and miR-16 were investigated
following plasma lipoprotein fractionation by isopycnic density gradient
ultrcentrifugation.
RESULTS: The miR-BART17 was significantly more abundant in plasma samples from
NPC patients compared to non-NPC donors. Above a threshold of 506 copies/mL,
detection of miR-BART17 was highly specific for NPC patients (ROC curve analysis:
AUC=0.87 with true positive rate = 0.77, false positive rate = 0.10). In this
relatively small series, the concentration of plasma miR-BART17 and the plasma
EBV DNA load were not correlated. When plasma samples were fractionated,
miR-BART17 co-purified with a protein-rich fraction but not with exosomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Detection of high concentrations of plasma miR-BART17 is consistent 
in NPC patients. This parameter is, at least in part, independent of the viral
DNA load. Circulating miR-BART17 does not co-purify with exosomes.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-10-119 
PMCID: PMC3685608
PMID: 23590857  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
