

25. Virology. 2016 Aug;495:52-62. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2016.05.005. Epub 2016 May 11.

Human papillomavirus promotes Epstein-Barr virus maintenance and lytic
reactivation in immortalized oral keratinocytes.

Makielski KR(1), Lee D(1), Lorenz LD(1), Nawandar DM(1), Chiu YF(2), Kenney
SC(1), Lambert PF(3).

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Oncology, School of
Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1111 Highland Ave., 
Madison, WI 53705, United States.
(2)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Oncology, School of
Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1111 Highland Ave., 
Madison, WI 53705, United States; Morgridge Institute for Research, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, 330 N. Orchard Street, Madison, WI 53715, United States.
(3)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Oncology, School of
Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1111 Highland Ave., 
Madison, WI 53705, United States. Electronic address: plambert@wisc.edu.

Epstein-Barr virus and human papillomaviruses are human tumor viruses that infect
and replicate in upper aerodigestive tract epithelia and cause head and neck
cancers. The productive phases of both viruses are tied to stratified epithelia
highlighting the possibility that these viruses may affect each other's life
cycles. Our lab has established an in vitro model system to test the effects of
EBV and HPV co-infection in stratified squamous oral epithelial cells. Our
results indicate that HPV increases maintenance of the EBV genome in the
co-infected cells and promotes lytic reactivation of EBV in upper layers of
stratified epithelium. Expression of the HPV oncogenes E6 and E7 were found to be
necessary and sufficient to account for HPV-mediated lytic reactivation of EBV.
Our findings indicate that HPV increases the capacity of epithelial cells to
support the EBV life cycle, which could in turn increase EBV-mediated
pathogenesis in the oral cavity.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2016.05.005 
PMCID: PMC4912861
PMID: 27179345  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
