

2504. Int J Cancer. 2012 Aug 1;131(3):E251-8. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27335. Epub 2011 Dec 2.

Combined p53-related genetic variants together with HPV infection increase oral
cancer risk.

Wang Z(1), Sturgis EM, Zhang Y, Huang Z, Zhou Q, Wei Q, Li G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

To explore the role of polymorphisms of p53-related genes in etiology of oral
cancer, we investigated joint effects of seven putatively functional
polymorphisms of p53 (codon 72 Arg/Pro), p73 (4/14 GC/AT), murine double minute 2
gene (MDM2; A2164G and T2580G) and MDM4 (rs11801299 G > A, rs10900598 G > T and
rs1380576 C > G) on risk of human papillomavirus (HPV)16-associated oral cancer
in a case-control study with 325 cases and 335 cancer-free controls. We found
that HPV16 seropositivity alone was associated with an increased risk of oral
cancer [adjusted odds ratio (OR), 3.1; 95% confidence interval (CI), 2.1-4.6].
After combining genotypes of seven polymorphisms and using the low-risk group
(0-3 combined risk genotypes) and HPV16 seronegativity as the reference group,
the medium-risk (4 combined risk genotypes) and high-risk groups (5-7 combined
risk genotypes) and HPV16 seronegativity were associated with only an OR of 1.6
(95% CI, 1.1-2.5) and 1.2 (95% CI, 0.7-1.9) for oral cancer risk, respectively,
whereas the low-risk, medium-risk and high-risk groups and HPV16 seropositivity
were significantly associated with a higher OR of 2.1 (95% CI, 1.2-3.6), 4.0 (95%
CI, 1.8-9.1) and 19.1 (95% CI, 5.7-64.2), respectively. Notably, such effect
modification by these combined risk genotypes was particularly pronounced in
young subjects (aged < 50 years), never smokers and patients with oropharyngeal
cancer. Taken together, these findings suggest that the combined risk genotypes
of p53-related genes may modify risk of HPV16-associated oral cancer, especially 
in young patients, never-smokers and patients with oropharyngeal cancer. Larger
studies are needed to validate our findings.

Copyright Â© 2011 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.27335 
PMCID: PMC3289741
PMID: 22052649  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
