

2505. Mol Cancer Ther. 2016 Oct;15(10):2486-2497. Epub 2016 Aug 9.

EGFR and RB1 as Dual Biomarkers in HPV-Negative Head and Neck Cancer.

Beck TN(1), Georgopoulos R(2), Shagisultanova EI(3), Sarcu D(2), Handorf EA(4),
Dubyk C(4), Lango MN(5), Ridge JA(5), Astsaturov I(6), Serebriiskii IG(7),
Burtness BA(8), Mehra R(6), Golemis EA(9).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Therapeutics, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Molecular and Cell Biology & Genetics Program, Drexel University College of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(2)Molecular Therapeutics, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Temple University School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(3)Breast Cancer Program, University of Colorado, Anschutz Medical Campus,
Aurora, Colorado.
(4)Molecular Therapeutics, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(5)Surgical Oncology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(6)Molecular Therapeutics, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Medical Oncology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(7)Molecular Therapeutics, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Kazan Federal University, Kazan, Russia.
(8)Developmental Therapeutics, Yale Cancer Center, New Haven, Connecticut.
(9)Molecular Therapeutics, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Molecular and Cell Biology & Genetics Program, Drexel University College of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Erica.Golemis@fccc.edu
ranee.mehra@fccc.edu.

Clinical decision making for human papillomavirus (HPV)-negative head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is predominantly guided by disease stage and
anatomic location, with few validated biomarkers. The epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) is an important therapeutic target, but its value in guiding
therapeutic decision making remains ambiguous. We integrated analysis of
clinically annotated tissue microarrays with analysis of data available through
the TCGA, to investigate the idea that expression signatures involving EGFR,
proteins regulating EGFR function, and core cell-cycle modulators might serve as 
prognostic or drug response-predictive biomarkers. This work suggests that
consideration of the expression of NSDHL and proteins that regulate EGFR
recycling in combination with EGFR provides a useful prognostic biomarker set. In
addition, inactivation of the tumor suppressor retinoblastoma 1 (RB1), reflected 
by CCND1/CDK6-inactivating phosphorylation of RB1 at T356, inversely correlated
with expression of EGFR in patient HNSCC samples. Moreover, stratification of
cases with high EGFR by expression levels of CCND1, CDK6, or the
CCND1/CDK6-regulatory protein p16 (CDKN2A) identified groups with significant
survival differences. To further explore the relationship between EGFR and
RB1-associated cell-cycle activity, we evaluated simultaneous inhibition of RB1
phosphorylation with the CDK4/6 inhibitor palbociclib and of EGFR activity with
lapatinib or afatinib. These drug combinations had synergistic inhibitory effects
on the proliferation of HNSCC cells and strikingly limited ERK1/2 phosphorylation
in contrast to either agent used alone. In summary, combinations of CDK and EGFR 
inhibitors may be particularly useful in EGFR and pT356RB1-expressing or
CCND1/CDK6-overexpressing HPV-negative HNSCC. Mol Cancer Ther; 15(10); 2486-97.
©2016 AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-16-0243 
PMCID: PMC5522587
PMID: 27507850  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
