

2507. Vaccine. 2017 May 2;35(19):2605-2611. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.03.025. Epub
2017 Apr 4.

Identification and characterization of enhancer agonist human cytotoxic T-cell
epitopes of the human papillomavirus type 16 (HPV16) E6/E7.

Tsang KY(1), Fantini M(1), Fernando RI(1), Palena C(1), David JM(1), Hodge JW(1),
Gabitzsch ES(2), Jones FR(2), Schlom J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Immunology and Biology, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, 10 Center Drive, Room
8B09, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(2)Etubics Corporation, 41 West Harrison Street, Suite 100, Seattle, WA 98119,
USA.
(3)Laboratory of Tumor Immunology and Biology, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, 10 Center Drive, Room
8B09, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address: js141c@nih.gov.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) is associated with the etiology of cervical carcinoma,
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, and several other cancer types. Vaccines
directed against HPV virus-like particles and coat proteins have been extremely
successful in the prevention of cervical cancer through the activation of host
HPV-specific antibody responses; however, HPV-associated cancers remain a major
public health problem. The development of a therapeutic vaccine will require the 
generation of T-cell responses directed against early HPV proteins (E6/E7)
expressed in HPV-infected tumor cells. Clinical studies using various vaccine
platforms have demonstrated that both HPV-specific human T cells can be generated
and patient benefit can be achieved. However, no HPV therapeutic vaccine has been
approved by the Food and Drug Administration to date. One method of enhancing the
potential efficacy of a therapeutic vaccine is the generation of agonist
epitopes. We report the first description of enhancer cytotoxic T lymphocyte
agonist epitopes for HPV E6 and E7. While the in silico algorithm revealed six
epitopes with potentially improved binding to human leukocyte antigen-A2 allele
(HLA-A2)-Class I, 5/6 demonstrated enhanced binding to HLA-Class I in cell-based 
assays and only 3/6 had a greater ability to activate HPV-specific T cells which 
could lyse tumor cells expressing native HPV, compared to their native epitope
counterparts. These agonist epitopes have potential for use in a range of HPV
therapeutic vaccine platforms and for use in HPV-specific adoptive T- or natural 
killer-cell platforms.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.03.025 
PMCID: PMC5444324
PMID: 28389098  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
