

2509. ORL J Otorhinolaryngol Relat Spec. 2017;79(1-2):14-23. doi: 10.1159/000455726.
Epub 2017 Feb 24.

Response Evaluation in Head and Neck Oncology: Definition and Prediction.

Hoffmann TK(1), Schuler PJ, Laban S, Grässlin R, Beer M, Beer AJ, Friebe-Hoffmann
U, Bullinger L, Möller P, Wiegel T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Ulm University
Medical Center, Ulm, Germany.

Curative treatment of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma includes surgery
and/or (chemo)radiation, whereas in the palliative setting, chemotherapy and/or
immunotherapy represent(s) the standard approach. With regard to quality control,
methods for determining treatment response are sorely needed. For surgical
therapy, histopathology is the standard quality control. Established criteria for
high-risk patients include resection margins of the primary tumor and
extracapsular extension of lymph node metastases. After definitive
chemoradiation, treatment response is generally evaluated by tomographic imaging 
combined with endoscopy including re-biopsy of the tumor region. Single-cycle
induction chemotherapy may be used to determine the radiosensitivity of tumors,
helping to define surgical and nonsurgical treatment options. Innovative
approaches with implications for prognosis include the analysis of immune
infiltrates, liquid biopsy, molecular characterization (proteomics, genomics),
molecular and functional imaging (PET-CT, PET-MRI), as well as advanced imaging
data analysis (radio[geno]mics/texture analysis). Human papilloma virus, as a
prognostically relevant parameter, is currently being investigated for
de-escalation strategies. With regard to the extended personalization of
oncologic therapy, markers predicting treatment response are desirable and seem
to be important, also from a socioeconomic perspective.

© 2017 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000455726 
PMID: 28231577  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
