

2512. Int J Cancer. 2012 Jun 15;130(12):2874-85. doi: 10.1002/ijc.26345. Epub 2011 Aug 
30.

Different DNA damage and cell cycle checkpoint control in low- and high-risk
human papillomavirus infections of the vulva.

Santegoets LA(1), van Baars R, Terlou A, Heijmans-Antonissen C, Swagemakers SM,
van der Spek PJ, Ewing PC, van Beurden M, van der Meijden WI, Helmerhorst TJ,
Blok LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam,
The Netherlands. l.santegoets@erasmusmc.nl

Human papillomavirus (HPV) infections may result in benign hyperplasia, caused by
low-risk HPV types, or (pre)malignant lesions caused by high-risk HPV types. The 
molecular basis of this difference in malignant potential is not completely
understood. Here, we performed gene profiling of different HPV infected vulvar
tissues (condylomata acuminata (n = 5), usual type vulvar intraepithelial
neoplasia (uVIN) (n = 9)) and control samples (n = 14) using Affymetrix Human
U133A plus 2 GeneChips. Data were analyzed using OmniViz®, Partek® and Ingenuity®
Software. Results were validated by real-time RT-PCR and immunostaining. Although
similarities were observed between gene expression profiles of low- and high-risk
HPV infected tissues (e.g., absence of estrogen receptor in condylomata and
uVIN), high-risk HPV infected tissues showed more proliferation and displayed
more DNA damage than tissues infected with low-risk HPV. These observations were 
confirmed by differential regulation of cell cycle checkpoints and by increased
expression of DNA damage-biomarkers p53 and γH2AX. Furthermore, FANCA, FANCD2,
BRCA1 and RAD51, key players in the DNA damage response, were significantly
upregulated (p < 0.05). In addition, we compared our results with publicly
available gene expression profiles of various other HPV-induced cancers (vulva,
cervix and head-and-neck). This showed p16(INK4a) was the most significant marker
to detect a high-risk HPV infection, but no other markers could be found. In
conclusion, this study provides insight into the molecular basis of low- and
high-risk HPV infections and indicates two main pathways (cell cycle and DNA
damage response) that are much stronger affected by high-risk HPV as compared to 
low-risk HPV.

Copyright © 2011 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.26345 
PMID: 21815142  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
