
Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.


2518. J Community Health. 2016 Feb;41(1):197-205. doi: 10.1007/s10900-015-0069-2.

HPV Vaccine Uptake Among Canadian Youth and The Role of the Nurse Practitioner.

Scott K(1), Batty ML(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Nursing, University of New Brunswick, 33 Dineen Drive, Fredericton,
NB, E3B 5A3, Canada. g6672@unb.ca.
(2)Faculty of Nursing, University of New Brunswick, 33 Dineen Drive, Fredericton,
NB, E3B 5A3, Canada.

The human papillomavirus (HPV) infects approximately 550,000 Canadians annually. 
Cancers of the cervix, mouth, anus, throat and neck are caused by various strains
of the virus. The virus also causes genital warts. The disease and economic
burden of HPV is high. Primary prevention through vaccine administration prior to
onset of sexual activity is evidenced as best practice. Two vaccines are
available, Gardasil and Cervarix. Consistent with global practices in developed
countries, these vaccines are currently publicly funded for females and provided 
in school-based clinics in all provinces and territories in Canada. Despite
well-documented efficacy with minimal adverse effects, the uptake of these
vaccines remains low in all countries, including Canada. Although HPV
immunization rates have increased, they remain significantly below the rates of
other vaccine-preventable diseases. This is puzzling since school-based clinics
and public funding presumably increase vaccine access. Barriers explicated
include family lack of knowledge about the vaccine, and attitudes that are not
informed by science and epidemiology. There is evidence that a health provider's 
recommendation is the single biggest influence on uptake. However, not all
providers are cognizant about emerging issues in this area, including
controversies about universal coverage for boys as well as girls, new vaccines
and more. Nurse practitioners are in a position to collaborate with public health
agencies to expand knowledge and coverage across Canada.

DOI: 10.1007/s10900-015-0069-2 
PMID: 26245727  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
