

2519. Head Neck. 2013 Jan;35(1):123-32. doi: 10.1002/hed.21898. Epub 2011 Oct 27.

Contemporary management of lymph node metastases from an unknown primary to the
neck: I. A review of diagnostic approaches.

Strojan P(1), Ferlito A, Medina JE, Woolgar JA, Rinaldo A, Robbins KT, Fagan JJ, 
Mendenhall WM, Paleri V, Silver CE, Olsen KD, Corry J, Suárez C, Rodrigo JP,
Langendijk JA, Devaney KO, Kowalski LP, Hartl DM, Haigentz M Jr, Werner JA,
Pellitteri PK, de Bree R, Wolf GT, Takes RP, Genden EM, Hinni ML, Mondin V, Shaha
AR, Barnes L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Institute of Oncology, Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Comment in
    Head Neck. 2012 Dec;34(12):1819-20; author reply 1820-1.

In an era of advanced diagnostics, metastasis to cervical lymph nodes from an
occult primary tumor is a rare clinical entity and accounts for approximately 3% 
of head and neck malignancies. Histologically, two thirds of cases are squamous
cell carcinomas (SCCs), with other tissue types less common in the neck. With
modern imaging and tissue examinations, a primary tumor initially undetected on
physical examination is revealed in >50% of patients and the site of the index
primary can be predicted with a high level of probability. In the present review,
the range and limitations of diagnostic procedures are summarized and the optimal
diagnostic workup is proposed. Initial preferred diagnostic procedures are a
fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) and imaging. This allows directed surgical
biopsy (such as tonsillectomy), based on the preliminary findings, and prevents
misinterpretation of postsurgical images. When no primary lesion is suggested
after imaging and panendoscopy, and for patients without a history of smoking and
alcohol abuse, molecular profiling of an FNAB sample for human papillomavirus
(HPV) and/or Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is important.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hed.21898 
PMID: 22034046  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
