

252. J Med Virol. 2013 Jan;85(1):105-9. doi: 10.1002/jmv.23431. Epub 2012 Oct 16.

Lack of evidence for an association between seminoma and human papillomavirus
infection using GP5+/GP6+ consensus primers.

Bertazzoni G(1), Sgambato A, Migaldi M, Grottola A, Sabbatini AM, Nanni N,
Farinetti A, Iachetta F, Giacobazzi E, Pecorari M, Bonetti LR.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Virology Unit, Policlinico Hospital, Modena, Italy.

Testicular germ cell tumors account for about 1% of all cancers. The incidence of
these tumors is increasing and they represent the most common solid malignancies 
of young men aged 15-40 years with seminoma being one of the most common
histotype. Pathogenesis of testicular germ cell tumors remains unknown and,
although cryptorchidism is considered the main risk factor, there is evidence of 
an association with environmental and genetic risk factors. Human
papillomaviruses (HPV) are a family of DNA viruses and represent a major risk
factor for cervical cancer. In addition, they have been associated with other
human non-malignant and malignant diseases, including breast and head and neck
cancer. HPV sequences have been detected throughout the male lower genitourinary 
tract as well as in seminal fluid and an increased testicular tumorigenesis has
been reported in HPV transgenic mice. Aim of this study was to evaluate the
potential involvement of HPV in human testicular tumorigenesis. Real-time PCR
employing GP5+/GP6+ consensus HPV primers was used to examine the presence of HPV
sequences in a subset of human seminoma (n = 61) and normal testicles (n = 23).
None of the specimens tested displayed the presence of HPV DNA. These findings do
not support an association between HPV and human seminoma and warrant further
studies to assess definitively the role of these viruses in human testicular
tumorigenesis.

Copyright Â© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.23431 
PMID: 23073996  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
