

2522. Lancet Oncol. 2013 Jul;14(8):697-710. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(13)70181-5. Epub
2013 Jun 6.

Cisplatin and fluorouracil with or without panitumumab in patients with recurrent
or metastatic squamous-cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SPECTRUM): an
open-label phase 3 randomised trial.

Vermorken JB(1), Stöhlmacher-Williams J, Davidenko I, Licitra L, Winquist E,
Villanueva C, Foa P, Rottey S, Skladowski K, Tahara M, Pai VR, Faivre S, Blajman 
CR, Forastiere AA, Stein BN, Oliner KS, Pan Z, Bach BA; SPECTRUM investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium. 
jan.b.vermorken@uza.be

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2013 Jul;14(8):672-3.
    Lancet Oncol. 2013 Oct;14(11):e437-8.
    Lancet Oncol. 2013 Oct;14(11):e436-7.
    J Comp Eff Res. 2013 Nov;2(6):533-5.

BACKGROUND: Previous trials have shown that anti-EGFR monoclonal antibodies can
improve clinical outcomes of patients with recurrent or metastatic squamous-cell 
carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN). We assessed the efficacy and safety of
panitumumab combined with cisplatin and fluorouracil as first-line treatment for 
these patients.
METHODS: This open-label phase 3 randomised trial was done at 126 sites in 26
countries. Eligible patients were aged at least 18 years; had histologically or
cytologically confirmed SCCHN; had distant metastatic or locoregionally recurrent
disease, or both, that was deemed to be incurable by surgery or radiotherapy; had
an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of 1 or less; and had
adequate haematological, renal, hepatic, and cardiac function. Patients were
randomly assigned according to a computer-generated randomisation sequence (1:1; 
stratified by previous treatment, primary tumour site, and performance status) to
one of two groups. Patients in both groups received up to six 3-week cycles of
intravenous cisplatin (100 mg/m(2) on day 1 of each cycle) and fluorouracil (1000
mg/m(2) on days 1-4 of each cycle); those in the experimental group also received
intravenous panitumumab (9 mg/kg on day 1 of each cycle). Patients in the
experimental group could choose to continue maintenance panitumumab every 3
weeks. The primary endpoint was overall survival and was analysed by intention to
treat. In a prospectively defined retrospective analysis, we assessed tumour
human papillomavirus (HPV) status as a potential predictive biomarker of outcomes
with a validated p16-INK4A (henceforth, p16) immunohistochemical assay. Patients 
and investigators were aware of group assignment; study statisticians were masked
until primary analysis; and the central laboratory assessing p16 status was
masked to identification of patients and treatment. This trial is registered with
ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00460265.
FINDINGS: Between May 15, 2007, and March 10, 2009, we randomly assigned 657
patients: 327 to the panitumumab group and 330 to the control group. Median
overall survival was 11·1 months (95% CI 9·8-12·2) in the panitumumab group and
9·0 months (8·1-11·2) in the control group (hazard ratio [HR] 0·873, 95% CI
0·729-1·046; p=0·1403). Median progression-free survival was 5·8 months (95% CI
5·6-6·6) in the panitumumab group and 4·6 months (4·1-5·4) in the control group
(HR 0·780, 95% CI 0·659-0·922; p=0·0036). Several grade 3 or 4 adverse events
were more frequent in the panitumumab group than in the control group: skin or
eye toxicity (62 [19%] of 325 included in safety analyses vs six [2%] of 325),
diarrhoea (15 [5%] vs four [1%]), hypomagnesaemia (40 [12%] vs 12 [4%]),
hypokalaemia (33 [10%] vs 23 [7%]), and dehydration (16 [5%] vs seven [2%]).
Treatment-related deaths occurred in 14 patients (4%) in the panitumumab group
and eight (2%) in the control group. Five (2%) of the fatal adverse events in the
panitumumab group were attributed to the experimental agent. We had appropriate
samples to assess p16 status for 443 (67%) patients, of whom 99 (22%) were p16
positive. Median overall survival in patients with p16-negative tumours was
longer in the panitumumab group than in the control group (11·7 months [95% CI
9·7-13·7] vs 8·6 months [6·9-11·1]; HR 0·73 [95% CI 0·58-0·93]; p=0·0115), but
this difference was not shown for p16-positive patients (11·0 months [7·3-12·9]
vs 12·6 months [7·7-17·4]; 1·00 [0·62-1·61]; p=0·998). In the control group,
p16-positive patients had numerically, but not statistically, longer overall
survival than did p16-negative patients (HR 0·70 [95% CI 0·47-1·04]).
INTERPRETATION: Although the addition of panitumumab to chemotherapy did not
improve overall survival in an unselected population of patients with recurrent
or metastatic SCCHN, it improved progression-free survival and had an acceptable 
toxicity profile. p16 status could be a prognostic and predictive marker in
patients treated with panitumumab and chemotherapy. Prospective assessment will
be necessary to validate our biomarker findings.
FUNDING: Amgen Inc.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(13)70181-5 
PMID: 23746666  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
