

2523. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2009 Nov 1;75(3):843-53. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.06.1953. Epub 2008 Oct 11.

Radiation increases invasion of gene-modified mesenchymal stem cells into tumors.

Zielske SP(1), Livant DL, Lawrence TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Michigan, 1331 E. Ann St., Ann
Arbor, MI 48109, USA. szielske@med.umich.edu

PURPOSE: Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are multipotent cells in the bone marrow
that have been found to migrate to tumors, suggesting a potential use for cancer 
gene therapy. MSCs migrate to sites of tissue damage, including normal tissues
damaged by radiation. In this study, we investigated the effect of tumor
radiotherapy on the localization of lentivirus-transduced MSCs to tumors.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: MSCs were labeled with a lipophilic dye to investigate
their migration to colon cancer xenografts. Subsequently, the MSCs were
transduced with a lentiviral vector to model gene therapy and mark the infused
MSCs. LoVo tumor xenografts were treated with increasing radiation doses to
assess the effect on MSC localization, which was measured by quantitative
polymerase chain reaction. MSC invasion efficiency was determined in an invasion 
assay.
RESULTS: MSCs migrated to tumor xenografts of various origins, with few cells
found in normal tissues. A lentiviral vector efficiently transduced MSCs in the
presence, but not the absence, of hexadimethrine bromide (Polybrene). When LoVo
tumors were treated with increasing radiation doses, more MSCs were found to
migrate to them than to untreated tumors. Irradiation increased MSC localization 
in HT-29 and MDA-MB-231, but not UMSCC1, xenografts. Monocyte chemotactic
protein-1 expression in tumors did not correlate with the basal levels of MSC
infiltration; however, monocyte chemotactic protein-1 was modestly elevated in
irradiated tumors. Media from irradiated LoVo cells stimulated MSC invasion into 
basement membranes.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that radiation-induced injury can be used to
target MSCs to tumors, which might increase the effectiveness of MSC cancer gene 
therapy. The production of tumor-derived factors in response to radiation
stimulates MSC invasion.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.06.1953 
PMCID: PMC2771691
PMID: 18849123  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
