

2524. Cancer Res. 2009 May 15;69(10):4407-14. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0023. Epub 
2009 May 12.

Persistence of high-grade cervical dysplasia and cervical cancer requires the
continuous expression of the human papillomavirus type 16 E7 oncogene.

Jabbar SF(1), Abrams L, Glick A, Lambert PF.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Oncology, University of 
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Several mucosotropic human papillomaviruses (HPV), including HPV type 16
(HPV-16), are etiologic agents of a subset of anogenital cancers and head and
neck squamous cell carcinomas. In mice, HPV-16 E7 is the most potent of the
papillomaviral oncogenes in the development of cervical disease. Furthermore,
interfering specifically with the expression of E7 in HPV-positive cell lines
derived from human cervical cancers inhibits their ability to proliferate,
indicating that the expression of E7 is important in maintaining the transformed 
phenotype in vitro. To assess the temporal role of E7 in maintaining
HPV-associated tumors and precancerous lesions in vivo, we generated Bi-L E7
transgenic mice that harbor a tetracycline-inducible transgene that expresses
both HPV-16 E7 and firefly luciferase. When we crossed Bi-L E7 mice to a K5-tTA
transgene-inducing line of mice, which expresses a tetracycline-responsive
transactivator selectively in the stratified squamous epithelia, the resulting
Bi-L E7/K5-tTA bitransgenic mice expressed E7 and luciferase in the skin and
cervical epithelium, and doxycycline repressed this expression. Bitransgenic mice
displayed several overt and acute epithelial phenotypes previously shown to be
associated with the expression of E7, and these phenotypes were reversed on
treatment with doxycycline. Repressing the expression of E7 caused the regression
of high-grade cervical dysplasia and established cervical tumors, indicating that
they depend on the continuous expression of E7 for their persistence. These
results suggest that E7 is a relevant target not only for anticancer therapy but 
also for the treatment of HPV-positive dysplastic cervical lesions.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0023 
PMCID: PMC3006677
PMID: 19435895  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
