

2530. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Nov 20;109(47):19403-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1210662109. Epub 2012 Nov 5.

Early responses to adenoviral-mediated transfer of the aquaporin-1 cDNA for
radiation-induced salivary hypofunction.

Baum BJ(1), Alevizos I, Zheng C, Cotrim AP, Liu S, McCullagh L, Goldsmith CM,
Burbelo PD, Citrin DE, Mitchell JB, Nottingham LK, Rudy SF, Van Waes C, Whatley
MA, Brahim JS, Chiorini JA, Danielides S, Turner RJ, Patronas NJ, Chen CC,
Nikolov NP, Illei GG.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Physiology and Therapeutics Branch, and Neurobiology and Pain
Therapeutics Section, National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. bbaum@mail.nih.gov

No conventional therapy exists for salivary hypofunction in surviving head and
neck cancer patients with Radiation Therapy Oncology Group late grade 2-3
toxicity. We conducted a phase I clinical trial to test the safety and biologic
efficacy of serotype 5, adenoviral-mediated aquaporin-1 cDNA transfer to a single
previously irradiated parotid gland in 11 subjects using an open label,
single-dose, dose-escalation design (AdhAQP1 vector; four dose tiers from 4.8 ×
10(7) to 5.8 × 10(9) vector particles per gland). Treated subjects were followed 
at scheduled intervals. Multiple safety parameters were measured and biologic
efficacy was evaluated with measurements of parotid salivary flow rate. Symptoms 
were assessed with a visual analog scale. All subjects tolerated vector delivery 
and study procedures well over the 42-d study period reported. No deaths, serious
adverse events, or dose-limiting toxicities occurred. Generally, few adverse
events occurred, and all were considered mild or moderate. No consistent changes 
were found in any clinical chemistry and hematology parameters measured.
Objective responses were seen in six subjects, all at doses <5.8 × 10(9) vector
particles per gland. Five of these six subjects also experienced subjective
improvement in xerostomia. AdhAQP1 vector delivery to a single parotid gland was 
safe and transfer of the hAQP1 cDNA increased parotid flow and relieved symptoms 
in a subset of subjects.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1210662109 
PMCID: PMC3511089
PMID: 23129637  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
