

2534. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 10;6(35):38296-307. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5699.

Combining plasma Epstein-Barr virus DNA and nodal maximal standard uptake values 
of 18F-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission tomography improved prognostic 
stratification to predict distant metastasis for locoregionally advanced
nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Chen WH(1), Tang LQ(1)(2), Zhang L(1)(2), Chen QY(1)(2), Guo SS(1)(2), Liu
LT(1)(2), Fan W(1)(3), Zhang X(1)(3), Guo L(1)(2), Zhao C(1)(2), Cao KJ(1)(2),
Qian CN(1)(2), Guo X(1)(2), Xie D(1), Zeng MS(1), Mai HQ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in
South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou
510060, China.
(2)Department of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, 
Guangzhou 510060, China.
(3)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center,
Guangzhou 510060, China.

BACKGROUND: This study aimed to evaluate the value of combining the nodal maximal
standard uptake values (SUVmax) of (18) F-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron
emission tomography with Epstein-Barr virus DNA(EBV DNA) levels to predict
distant metastasis for nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Eight hundred seventy-four patients with stage III-IVa-b
NPC were evaluated for the effects of combining SUVmax and EBV DNA levels on
distant metastasis-free survival (DMFS), disease-free survival (DFS) and overall 
survival (OS).
RESULTS: The optimal cutoff value was 6,220 copies/mL for EBV DNA and 7.5 for
SUVmax-N. Patients with lower EBV DNA levels or SUVmax-N had a significantly
better 3-year DMFS, DFS, and OS. Patients were divided into four groups based on 
EBV DNA and SUVmax-N, as follows: low EBV DNA and low SUVmax-N (LL), low EBV DNA 
and high SUVmax-N (LH), high EBV DNA and low SUVmax-N (HL), and high EBV DNA and 
high SUVmax-N (HH). There were significant differences between the four mentioned
groups in 3-year DMFS: 95.7%, 92.2%, 92.3%, and 80.1%, respectively (P(trend) <
0.001). When looking at the disease stage, the 3-year DMFS in group LL, LH, HL,
HH were 94.2%, 92.9%, 95.0%, and 81.1%, respectively, in stage III patients
(P(trend) < 0.001) and 92.7%, 87.2%, 86.3%, and 77.0% in stage IVa-b patients
(P(trend) = 0.026).
CONCLUSION: Pretreatment EBV DNA and SUVmax of neck lymph nodes were independent 
prognostic factors for distant metastasis in NPC patients. Combining EBV DNA and 
SUVmax-N led to an improved risk stratification for distant metastasis in
advanced-stage disease.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.5699 
PMCID: PMC4742000
PMID: 26512922  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
