

2535. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2016;40(1-2):126-136. Epub 2016 Nov 18.

CD47 is a Potential Target for the Treatment of Laryngeal Squamous Cell
Carcinoma.

Yang C(1), Gao S, Zhang H, Xu L, Liu J, Wang M, Zhang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, The Second Affiliated
Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang, China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: This study aims to investigate the effect of CD47 on the
development of laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) and the therapeutic
potential of monoclonal antibody against CD47 and its ligand SIRPα in the
treatment of LSCC.
METHODS: We firstly detected the expressions of CD47 mRNA and protein in LSCC and
para-carcinoma tissues, introduced the most efficient CD47siRNA sequence into
LSCC cells by lentiviral transfection and employed three monoclonal antibodies to
evaluate their anti-LSCC effects in vitro and in vivo.
RESULTS: We observed that the mRNA and protein expressions of CD47 in LSCC tissue
had significant increase in LSCC tissues compared with those in para-carcinoma
tissue (p < 0.05). After the treatments of three monoclonal antibodies, i.e.
anti-SIRPα, anti-CD47 BRIC126, anti-CD47 B6H12.2, in rats transfected with Hep-2 
cell, it has been showed that the mRNA and protein expressions of CD47 in LSCC
tissue decreased, macrophage efficiency was promoted when anti-SIRPα and/or
CD47siRNA were used, the amounts, viabilities and expressions of CD47 protein of 
tumor cell were significantly inhibited. Additionally, combined use of CD47siRNA 
and anti-SIRPα seemed more efficient than solo use of CD47siRNA/anti-SIRPα.
CONCLUSION: The results suggested a critical role of CD47 in LSCC development and
the promising treatment of antiCD47/SIRPα and/or CD47siRNA in LSCC.

© 2016 The Author(s) Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000452530 
PMID: 27855370  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
