

2541. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 23;285(17):13285-93. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.086058. Epub
2010 Feb 24.

Trimeric structure of langerin.

Feinberg H(1), Powlesland AS, Taylor ME, Weis WI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California 94306, USA.

Langerin, an endocytic receptor of Langerhans cells, binds pathogens such as
human immunodeficiency virus by recognition of surface glycoconjugates and
mediates their internalization into Birbeck granules. Langerin has an
extracellular region consisting of a C-type carbohydrate-recognition domain (CRD)
and a neck region that stabilizes formation of trimers. As in many other C-type
lectins, oligomerization is required for high affinity binding to glycan ligands 
and is also likely to be important for determining specificity. To facilitate
structural analysis of the human langerin trimer, a truncated form of the
extracellular region, consisting of part of the neck and the CRD, has been
characterized. Like the full-length protein, truncated langerin exists as a
stable trimer in solution. Glycan array screening with the trimeric fragment
shows that high mannose oligosaccharides are the best ligands for langerin.
Structural analysis of the trimeric fragment of langerin confirms that the neck
region forms a coiled-coil of alpha-helices. Multiple interactions between the
neck region and the CRDs make the trimer a rigid unit with the three CRDs in
fixed positions and the primary sugar-binding sites separated by a distance of 42
A. The fixed orientation of the sugar-binding sites in the trimer is likely to
place constraints on the ligands that can be bound by langerin.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.086058 
PMCID: PMC2857130
PMID: 20181944  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
