

2548. World J Surg Oncol. 2015 Mar 7;13:94. doi: 10.1186/s12957-015-0481-1.

Surveillance radiologic imaging after treatment of oropharyngeal cancer: a
review.

Wang SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of California, 
2233 Post St, 3rd Floor, San Francisco, CA, 94115, USA. swang@ohns.ucsf.edu.

The increasing proportion of human papilloma virus-related oropharynx cancers has
led to improved success in the treatment of this disease. However, the current
low recurrence rate after treatment of oropharyngeal cancer highlights the
continued need for, as well as the challenges of, designing an effective
follow-up surveillance program. There are frequently multiple modalities used in 
the treatment of oropharyngeal cancer, resulting in short- and long-term tissue
changes to the head and neck that challenge clinical distinction of recurrence
versus treatment-related changes. The oropharynx subsite is characterized by
complex anatomy not always accessible to physical exam, making radiologic imaging
a potentially useful supplement for effective follow-up assessment. In this
manuscript, the literature regarding the type of radiologic imaging modality and 
the frequency of obtaining imaging studies in the surveillance follow-up after
treatment of oropharyngeal cancer is reviewed. While ultrasound and MRI have
useful characteristics that deserve further study, PET/CT appears to have the
best sensitivity and specificity for imaging surveillance follow-up of head and
neck cancers including oropharyngeal cancer. A negative PET/CT is particularly
useful as a predictor of prognosis and can guide the clinician as to when to stop
obtaining additional imaging studies in the absence of clinical signs of
recurrence. However, there is scant evidence that imaging surveillance can
improve survival outcomes. Suggestions to guide future imaging surveillance
research studies are provided.

DOI: 10.1186/s12957-015-0481-1 
PMCID: PMC4358873
PMID: 25889162  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
