

2550. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Oct 15;21(20):4597-606. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-3338.
Epub 2015 Jul 2.

Increased Expression of HER2, HER3, and HER2:HER3 Heterodimers in HPV-Positive
HNSCC Using a Novel Proximity-Based Assay: Implications for Targeted Therapies.

Pollock NI(1), Wang L(1), Wallweber G(2), Gooding WE(1), Huang W(2), Chenna A(2),
Winslow J(2), Sen M(1), DeGrave KA(1), Li H(1), Zeng Y(1), Grandis JR(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(2)Monogram Biosciences/Labcorp, Inc., South San Francisco, California.
(3)University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California.
Jennifer.grandis@ucsf.edu.

Comment in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2016 Apr 1;22(7):1825.
    Clin Cancer Res. 2016 Apr 1;22(7):1826.

PURPOSE: In other cancer types, HPV infection has been reported to coincide with 
overexpression of HER2 (ERBB2) and HER3 (ERBB3); however, the association between
HER2 or HER3 expression and dimer formation in HNSCC has not been reported.
Overexpression of HER2 and HER3 may contribute to resistance to EGFR inhibitors, 
including cetuximab, although the contribution of HPV in modulating cetuximab
response remains unknown. Determination of heterodimerization of HER receptors is
challenging and has not been reported in HNSCC. The present study aimed to
determine the expression of HER proteins in HPV(+) versus HPV(-) HNSCC tumors
using a proximity-based protein expression assay (VeraTag), and to determine the 
efficacy of HER-targeting agents in HPV(+) and HPV(-) HNSCC cell lines.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Expression of total HER1, HER2, and HER3, p95HER2, p-HER3,
HER1:HER1 homodimers, HER2:HER3 heterodimers, and the HER3-PI3K complex in 88
HNSCC was determined using VeraTag, including 33 baseline tumors from individuals
treated in a trial including cetuximab. Inhibition of cell growth and protein
activation with cetuximab and afatinib was compared in HPV(+) and HPV(-)
cetuximab-resistant cell lines.
RESULTS: Expression of total HER2, total HER3, HER2:HER3 heterodimers, and the
HER3:PI3K complex were significantly elevated in HPV(+) HNSCC. Total EGFR was
significantly increased in HPV(-) HNSCC where VeraTag assay results correlated
with IHC. Afatinib significantly inhibited cell growth when compared with
cetuximab in the HPV(+) and HPV(-) cetuximab-resistant HNSCC cell lines.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that agents targeting multiple HER proteins
may be effective in the setting of HPV(+) HNSCC and/or cetuximab resistance.

Â©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-3338 
PMCID: PMC4609280
PMID: 26138066  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
