

2551. Int J Mol Sci. 2014 Oct 29;15(11):19729-40. doi: 10.3390/ijms151119729.

Overexpression of microRNA-30b improves adenovirus-mediated p53 cancer gene
therapy for laryngeal carcinoma.

Li L(1), Wang B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, the First Hospital,
Shanxi Medical University, 85 South Jiefang Road, Taiyuan 030001, China.
liliang_mu1983@163.com.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, the First Hospital,
Shanxi Medical University, 85 South Jiefang Road, Taiyuan 030001, China.
wbq_xy@163.com.

MicroRNAs play important roles in laryngeal carcinoma and other cancers. However,
the expression of microRNAs in paracancerous tissue has been studied less. Here, 
using laser capture microdissection (LCM), we detected the expression of
microRNAs in paracancerous tissues. Among all down-regulated microRNAs in the
center area of tumor tissues, only miR-30b expression was significantly reduced
in paracancerous tissues compared to surgical margins. Therefore, to further
investigate the effect of miR-30b on laryngeal carcinoma, we stably overexpressed
miR-30b in laryngeal carcinoma cell line HEp-2 cells. It was found that although 
there was no significant difference in cell viability between miR-30b
overexpressed cells and control HEp-2 cells, p53 expression was obviously
enhanced in miR-30b overexpressed cells. Whether miR-30b could improve the
anti-tumor effect of adenovirus-p53 (Ad-p53) in laryngeal carcinoma and other
cancer cell lines was also evaluated. It was found that in miR-30b overexpressed 
HEp-2 cells, p53-mediated tumor cell apoptosis was obviously increased both in
vitro and in vivo. MDM2-p53 interaction might be involved in miR-30b-mediated
anti-tumor effect. Together, results suggested that miR-30b could modulate p53
pathway and enhance p53 gene therapy-induced apoptosis in laryngeal carcinoma,
which could provide a novel microRNA target in tumor therapy.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms151119729 
PMCID: PMC4264135
PMID: 25356506  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
