

2554. Strahlenther Onkol. 2015 Mar;191(3):209-16. doi: 10.1007/s00066-014-0753-7. Epub 
2014 Sep 25.

Improved survival in HPV/p16-positive oropharyngeal cancer patients treated with 
postoperative radiotherapy.

Heiduschka G(1), Grah A, Oberndorfer F, Kadletz L, Altorjai G, Kornek G, Wrba F, 
Thurnher D, Selzer E.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Otorhinolaryngology: Head and Neck Surgery, Medical University 
of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

INTRODUCTION: In the literature, HPV infection and/or p16 positivity have been
consistently demonstrated to correlate with improved response rates in
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) patients treated with primary
radiotherapy (RT) alone and in combination with chemotherapy. However, the exact 
role of HPV/p16 positivity in patients treated with postoperative RT is still
unclear.
METHODS: We analyzed tumor samples for HPV-DNA and p16 expression and correlated 
these variables with treatment outcome in a series of 63 consecutively treated
oropharyngeal cancer patients (95% stage III/IV). HPV and p16 analysis were
performed using validated test systems. Survival was estimated by the
Kaplan-Meier method. Cox proportional hazard regression models were applied to
compare the risk of death among patients stratified according to risk factors.
RESULTS: Expression of p16 or high-risk HPV-DNA was detected in 60.3% and 39.6%
of the tumors, respectively. p16 expression [overall survival (OS) at 2 years:
91%] as well as HPV infection (OS at 2 years: 95%) was associated with improved
OS. Mean survival in p16-positive patients was 112 months compared to 64.6 months
in case of p16 negativity. All HPV-positive tumors stained positive for p16. In a
multivariable analysis, p16 positivity was associated with improved OS and with
disease-free survival.
CONCLUSION: p16 expression and HPV infection are strongly associated with the
outcome of postoperatively irradiated OPSCC patients. HPV and p16 double-negative
OPSCC patients should be regarded as a distinct "very high-risk patient group"
that may benefit from intensified or novel treatment combinations.

DOI: 10.1007/s00066-014-0753-7 
PMID: 25252603  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
