

2557. Acta Cytol. 2010 Sep-Oct;54(5):707-11.

Fine needle aspiration of follicular dendritic cell sarcoma in an HIV-positive
man: a case report.

Kure K(1), Khader SN, Suhrland MJ, Ratech H, Grossberg R, Oktay MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine/Montefiore
Medical Center, Bronx, New York, USA.

BACKGROUND: Follicular dendritic cell (FDC) sarcoma is an uncommon neoplasm
occurring not only in lymph nodes but also in extranodal sites. Because of an
increasing number of case reports, awareness of this tumor has grown. The nature 
of the disease and its relation to other diseases, treatment, prognosis and
immunochemistry findings are being actively studied. So far, only a limited
number of cytology cases describing the fine needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy
findings of FDC sarcoma have been reported.
CASE: A 47-year-old man had a history of hypertension and human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV) infection treated with antiretroviral therapy. He developed a slowly 
growing, nontender right neck mass over the course of 3 years. FNA revealed
sheets and thick syncytial clusters of bland cells with pale cytoplasm and
indistinct cell borders, round to oval nuclei with fine or vesicular chromatin,
and small nucleoli. The mass was subsequently excised. A diagnosis of FDC sarcoma
was made based on the histologic appearance and the marker studies. Conclusion
The diagnosis ofFDC sarcoma in FNA can be suspected if a pathologist is aware of 
its characteristic features. Research studies have demonstrated the presence of
HIV-related FDC hyperplasia. It is likely that HIV infection may have played a
role in tumor formation in this patient. (Acta

DOI: 10.1159/000325237 
PMID: 20968160  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
