

2562. Pol J Pathol. 2015 Mar;66(1):80-5.

Uncontrolled human papilloma virus infection in a 28-year-old man leading to
death - case report and review of literature.

Szybiak B(1), Marszałek A, Łuczewski Ł, Golusinski P, Pazdrowski J, Majchrzak E, 
Pieńkowski P, Golusinski W.

Author information: 
(1)Bartosz Szybiak, Head and Neck Department, Greater Poland Cancer Center,
Garbary 15, 61-866 Poznan, Poland, e-mail: bartek.szybiak@wp.pl.

Recurrent respiratory papillomatosis is an increasingly common disease which
leads to organic and functional limitations. Clinical symptoms depend on the
location and extent of the papillomatosis. They include hoarseness, cough, and,
in some cases, significant narrowing of the respiratory and digestive tracts. The
present report describes a fatal case of a young man (28 years old) who developed
a very dynamic papilloma infection of the larynx, which spread to the trachea,
the oesophagus, the soft tissues of the neck, and the mediastinum. Multimodal
treatment did not stop the progression of the disease. The papillomatous lesion
was removed with a CO2 laser used in a Kleinsasser microlaryngoscopy and under a 
microscope using a electrocoagulation loop with argon plasma during the
gastroscopy. Antiviral treatment with cidofovir was introduced, as well as in
further follow-up radiotherapy. Congenital or acquired immunodeficiency was also 
excluded. Despite multimodal treatment, successful eradication of the infection
was not possible. In our case, aggressive progression of the disease was
observed. We were unable to confirm malignant transformation. Papillomatosis was 
the only disease, and its aggressive development led to the patient's death. In
the case of aggressive, uncontrolled progression - when the infiltration spreads 
beyond the larynx and the hypopharynx - there are no alternative treatment
methods that would lead to an effective cure.


PMID: 26017885  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
