

2563. Medicine (Baltimore). 2016 Jul;95(28):e4144. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000004144.

Cerebrospinal fluid analysis for HIV replication and biomarkers of immune
activation and neurodegeneration in long-term atazanavir/ritonavir monotherapy
treated patients.

Ferretti F(1), Bigoloni A, Passeri L, Galli L, Longo V, Gerevini S, Spagnuolo V, 
Gisslen M, Zetterberg H, Fuchs D, Cattaneo D, Caramatti G, Lazzarin A, Cinque P, 
Castagna A.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Infectious Diseases, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute
bNeuroradiology Unit, Head and Neck Department, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific
Institute, Milan, Italy cDepartment of Infectious Diseases, University of
Gothenburg, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg dClinical Neurochemistry 
Laboratory, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, The Sahlgrenska Academy,
University of Gothenburg, Mölndal, Sweden eDepartment of Molecular Neuroscience, 
Institute of Neurology, University College London, London, UK fDivision of
Biological Chemistry, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria gUnit of
Clinical Pharmacology, L. Sacco University Hospital, Milan, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) viral escape is a concern in
ritonavir-boosted protease inhibitors monotherapy. The aim was to assess HIV-RNA,
biomarkers of immune activation and neurodegeneration, and atazanavir
concentrations in CSF of patients on successful long-term atazanavir/ritonavir
(ATV/r) monotherapy.
METHODS: This is a substudy of the multicentric, randomized, open-label,
noninferiority trial monotherapy once a day with atazanavir/ritonavir
(NCT01511809), comparing the ongoing ATV/r along with 2 nucleoside
retrotranscriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) regimen to a simplified ATV/r monotherapy. 
Patients with plasma HIV-RNA < 50 copies/mL after at least 96 study weeks were
eligible.We assessed HIV-RNA, soluble (s)CD14, sCD163, CCL2, CXCL10,
interleukin-6, and YKL40 by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; neopterin,
tryptophan, kynurenine, and neurofilament by immunoassays; and ATV concentrations
by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry in paired plasma and CSF samples.
Variables were compared with Wilcoxon rank-sum or Fisher exact test, as
appropriate.
RESULTS: HIV-RNA was detected in the CSF of 1/11 patients on ATV/r monotherapy
(114 copies/mL), without neurological symptoms, who was successfully
reintensified with his previous 2NRTIs, and in none of the 12 patients on ATV/r +
2NRTIs. CSF biomarkers and ATV concentrations did not differ between the 2 arms.
CONCLUSIONS: CSF escape was uncommon in patients on long-term ATV/r monotherapy
and was controlled with reintensification.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000004144 
PMCID: PMC4956796
PMID: 27428202  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
