

2569. Arch Argent Pediatr. 2016 Aug 1;114(4):e268-71. doi: 10.5546/aap.2016.e268. Epub 
2016 Aug 1.

[Saint Louis encephalitis: case report].

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Carballo C(1), Cabana M(2), Ledezma F(2), Pascual C(2), Cazes C(2), Mistchenko
A(2), López E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Infectología Infantil, Hospital de Niños Ricardo Gutiérrez, Ciudad
Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina. Carolinacarballo1981@gmail.com.
(2)Servicio de Infectología Infantil, Hospital de Niños Ricardo Gutiérrez, Ciudad
Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Saint Louis encephalitis is transmitted by Culex mosquitoes. In Argentina
sporadic cases are registered. Symptomatic illness is unusual in children. We
present a case of meningoencephalitis caused by an uncommon viral infection. The 
clinical signs and symptoms are unusual for pediatric patients and the bilateral 
thalamic compromise showed on magnetic resonance has not been described
previously. An 8-year-old girl consulted due to fever, behavior disorders and
ataxia. Clonus and neck stiffness were detected at physical exam. Cerebrospinal
fluid revealed mononuclear leukocytosis; bilateral ischemic compromise was
observed in thalamus by magnetic resonance. Saint Louis virus was confirmed by
serology: serum and cerebrospinal fluid IgM were positive during the acute phase 
of the disease and serum IgG was positive four weeks later. Most of the signs and
symptoms of the disease were resolved, however mild behavior disorders were
observed as acute sequelae up to 45 days after hospital discharge.

Publisher: La encefalitis por el virus de Saint Louis es una enfermedad que se
transmite a través de mosquitos de la especie Culex.En Argentina, se registran
casos esporádicos, habitualmente asintomáticos en niños. Se presenta el caso de
una paciente con manifestaciones clínicas inusuales en edad pediátrica y lesiones
en el sistema nervioso central no descritas hasta el momento en la literatura. Se
trata de una niña de 8 años, que consultó por síndrome febril, cambios
conductuales, ataxia, clonus y rigidez de nuca. En el líquido cefalorraquídeo, se
detectó pleocitosis predominantemente mononuclear. Se realizó una resonancia
magnética, que evidenció imágenes de isquemia bitalámica. La infección por virus 
de Saint Louis se diagnosticó por IgM en el suero y el líquido cefalorraquídeo.
La paciente evolucionó de manera favorable. Al momento del egreso hospitalario,
persistía con bradipsiquia y alteraciones conductuales y se recuperó
definitivamente 45 días después del alta.
Sociedad Argentina de Pediatría.

DOI: 10.5546/aap.2016.e268 
PMID: 27399031  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
