

2570. J Med Case Rep. 2018 Apr 23;12(1):104. doi: 10.1186/s13256-018-1667-2.

Pembrolizumab combined with stereotactic body radiotherapy in a patient with
human immunodeficiency virus and advanced non-small cell lung cancer: a case
report.

Li D(1), He C(1), Xia Y(2), Du Y(3), Zhang J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Bone and Soft Tissue Tumors Research Center of Yunnan Province, Department of 
Orthopaedics, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical University (Tumor 
Hospital of Yunnan Province), Kunming, Yunnan, 650118, People's Republic of
China.
(2)Department of Radiotherapy, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical
University (Tumor Hospital of Yunnan Province), Kunming, Yunnan, 650118, People's
Republic of China.
(3)Lung Cancer Research Center, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical 
University (Tumor Hospital of Yunnan Province), Kunming, Yunnan, 650118, People's
Republic of China.
(4)Bone and Soft Tissue Tumors Research Center of Yunnan Province, Department of 
Orthopaedics, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical University (Tumor 
Hospital of Yunnan Province), Kunming, Yunnan, 650118, People's Republic of
China. zhangjingnmlimit@tom.com.

BACKGROUND: Pembrolizumab has significantly improved outcomes in patients with
advanced non-small cell lung cancer. Combining programmed death-1 inhibitor with 
stereotactic body radiotherapy showed a slight toxicity and good benefits in
recent clinical trials. However, patients infected with human immunodeficiency
virus were excluded from most trials because it was assumed that their anti-tumor
immunity was compromised compared with immunocompetent patients.
CASE PRESENTATION: In June 2016, a 52-year-old Chinese man presented with human
immunodeficiency virus and lung adenocarcinoma (T1bN3M1b). From November 2016 to 
December 2016, systemic chemotherapy and palliative radiotherapy for bone
metastasis of femoral neck were carried out, but the tumor progressed. In January
2017, after immunochemistry detection of programmed death-1 and programmed
death-ligand 1 expression (both > 50%), pembrolizumab was started. Three weeks
after pembrolizumab, we combined stereotactic body radiotherapy for the primary
lung tumor. He received no comfort and his CD4 lymphocyte count was stable. Human
immunodeficiency virus-ribonucleic acid remained below the limits of detection.
In March 2017, after three cycles of pembrolizumab and 5 weeks of stereotactic
body radiotherapy therapy, he suddenly presented with palpitations. Emergency
computed tomography scanning showed massive pericardial effusion and interstitial
pneumonia. So we interrupted the pembrolizumab use and initiated treatment with
prednisolone 1 mg/kg; however, the tumor progressed. Then, his CD4 lymphocyte
count declined. Finally he died in June 2017 due to dyscrasia.
CONCLUSIONS: Pembrolizumab combined with SBRT therapy for patients with human
immunodeficiency virus infection and non-small cell lung cancer may lead to
serious immune-related adverse events and more clinical trials are needed.

DOI: 10.1186/s13256-018-1667-2 
PMCID: PMC5911965
PMID: 29681240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
