

2573. Acta Otolaryngol. 2014 Aug;134(8):843-51. doi: 10.3109/00016489.2014.890289. Epub
2014 Jun 16.

High-risk HPV and survival in patients with oral and oropharyngeal squamous cell 
carcinoma - 5-year follow up of a population-based study.

Annertz K(1), Rosenquist K, Andersson G, Jacobsson H, Hansson BG, Wennerberg J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Otorhinolaryngology/Head & Neck Surgery, Department of Clinical
Sciences, Lund University , Lund.

CONCLUSION: No statistically significant 5-year survival difference was seen in
patients with oral and oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OOPSCC) between
high-risk HPV-positive and -negative groups in this population-based study.
OBJECTIVES: To see if the formerly observed higher risk for recurrence or second 
primary tumour (SPT) in high-risk HPV-positive patients with OOPSCC corresponds
to worse survival.
METHODS: A total of 128 consecutive, previously untreated patients with OOPSCC,
who were part of a population-based case-control study in southern Sweden during 
2000-2004, were included. A mouthwash sample was collected and exfoliated cells
were collected with cotton-tipped swabs from the tonsillar fossa and the tumour. 
Specimens were analysed for HPV DNA using nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
Disease-specific survival (DSS) and DSS difference between HPV-negative and
HPV-positive patients were calculated. The relationship between age, stage,
high-risk HPV status and DSS was assessed. Oral and oropharyngeal tumours were
assessed separately.
RESULTS: Mean DSS in months was 80.7/68.6 (high-risk HPV-negative/high-risk
HPV-positive) for oral cavity tumours (p = 0.18) and 67.6/78.3 (high-risk
HPV-negative/high-risk HPV-positive) for oropharyngeal tumours (p = 0.47). For
oral cavity tumours, age, T status, N status and stage all showed significant
differences in DSS. For oropharyngeal tumours, no significant difference
regarding DSS was found.

DOI: 10.3109/00016489.2014.890289 
PMID: 24930912  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
