

2577. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2014 Jun;271(6):1737-45. doi:
10.1007/s00405-013-2693-8. Epub 2013 Sep 25.

Comparison of HPV prevalence in HNSCC patients with regard to regional and
socioeconomic factors.

Krupar R(1), Hartl M, Wirsching K, Dietmaier W, Strutz J, Hofstaedter F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Regensburg, Franz-Josef-Strauss-Allee
11, 93053, Regensburg, Germany, rosemarie.krupar@ukr.de.

HPV infection is considered as an independent risk factor for head and neck
squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC). Due to highly variable prevalence results in
numerous studies, it is, however, difficult to estimate the relevance of HPV
infection as risk factor for a specific patient collective. This study aimed to
elucidate the disparities of HPV prevalence by analyzing socioeconomically and
regionally different patient collectives. Two age, gender, stage and tumor
location matched cohorts of 18 private health insured (PHIP) and 16 statutory
health insured patients (SIP) suffering from an oropharyngeal squamous cell
carcinoma (OSCC) and treated at a university hospital were screened for p16
overexpression and HPV infection by immunohistochemistry and PCR. In addition 85 
HNSCC patients of an otolaryngology private practice (PPP) in a rural area were
screened for p16 overexpression and positive cases were tested for HPV infection.
HPV prevalence was 72.2% in the PHIP collective in comparison to 25.0% (p =
0.015) in the SIP collective with a significantly improved 5-year overall
survival (p = 0.003) of the PHIP collective. The total HPV prevalence of PPP
group was 7.1% with the highest infection rate in tonsillar carcinomas (33.3%)
and a larger percentage of female patients in the HPV positive group (p = 0.037).
This study shows that variable HPV infection rates in HNSCC can be caused by the 
selection of particular patient collectives, which suggest taking socioeconomic
and regional factors into account for a decision on HPV testing, if it is not
performed on a routine basis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-013-2693-8 
PMID: 24065189  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
