

2578. Oncotarget. 2016 Apr 5;7(14):18665-77. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7625.

High expression of myoferlin is associated with poor outcome in oropharyngeal
squamous cell carcinoma patients and is inversely associated with HPV-status.

Kumar B(1)(2), Brown NV(3), Swanson BJ(4), Schmitt AC(4)(5), Old M(1)(2), Ozer
E(1)(2), Agrawal A(1)(2), Schuller DE(1)(2), Teknos TN(1)(2), Kumar P(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(2)Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210,
USA.
(3)Center for Biostatistics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(5)Current affiliation: Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30303, USA.

Myoferlin (MYOF) is a member of ferlin family of membrane proteins that was
originally discovered as a muscle specific protein. Recent studies have shown
that myoferlin is also expressed in other cell types including endothelial cells 
and cancer cells. However, very little is known about the expression and
biological role of myoferlin in head and neck cancer. In this study, we examined 
expression profile of myoferlin in oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) 
and assessed its correlation with disease progression and patient outcome. In
univariate analyses, nuclear MYOF was associated with poor overall survival
(p<0.001) and these patients had 5.5 times increased hazard of death (95% Cl
3.4-8.8). Nuclear myoferlin expression was also directly associated with tumor
recurrence (p<0.001), perineural invasion (p=0.008), extracapsular spread
(p=0.009), higher T-stage (p=0.0015) and distant metastasis (p<0.001). In
addition, nuclear MYOF expression was directly associated with IL-6 (p<0.001) and
inversely with HPV status (p=0.0014). In a subgroup survival analysis, MYOF
nuclear+/IL-6+ group had worst survival (84.6% mortality), whereas MYOF
nuclear-/IL-6- had the best survival. Similarly, patients with
HPV-negative/MYOF-positive tumors had worse survival compared to
HPV-positive/MYOF-negative. Taken together, our results demonstrate for the first
time that nuclear myoferlin expression independently predicts poor clinical
outcome in OPSCC patients.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.7625 
PMCID: PMC4951318
PMID: 26919244  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
