

2580. Folia Histochem Cytobiol. 2011;49(1):34-40.

Effect of human papillomavirus on cell cycle-related proteins p16INK4A,
p21waf1/cip1, p53 and cyclin D1 in sinonasal inverted papilloma and laryngeal
carcinoma. An in situ hybridization study.

Stasikowska-Kanicka O(1), WÄ…growska-Danilewicz M, Danilewicz M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephropathology, Medical University of Lodz, Poland.
olgast@op.pl

Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is implicated as an important risk factor in
the development of head and neck cancers. Many studies focusing on the
relationships between HPV infection and cell cycle proteins immunoexpression in
laryngeal lesions have provided contradictory results. The aim of this study was 
to evaluate the relationships between HPV DNA presence and p16INK4a,
p21waf1/cip1, p53 and cyclin D1 immunoexpression in heterogenous HPV-positive and
HPV-negative groups of laryngeal cancers and inverted papillomas. The HPV DNA
expression was detected using an in situ hybridization method and
immunoexpression of p16INK4a, p21waf1/cip1, p53 and cyclin D1 using
immunohistochemistry. The immunoexpression of p21waf1/ /cip1 and p53 proteins was
lower in the HPV-positive group compared to the HPV-negative group, although only
the difference of p53 staining was statistically significant. The
immunoexpression of p16INK4a and cyclin D1 was significantly increased in the
HPV-positive group compared to the HPV-negative group. The increased
immunoexpression of p16INK4a and cyclin D1, and the lower immunoexpression of
p21waf1/cip1 and p53 in the HPV-positive group compared to the HPV-negative
group, supports the hypothesis that HPV may play an important role in cell cycle 
dysregulation.


PMID: 21526487  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
