

2582. Endocr Pract. 2010 Jul-Aug;16(4):547-53. doi: 10.4158/EP09197.OR.

Hypovitaminosis D and bone mineral density in human immunodeficiency
virus-infected men from India, with or without antiretroviral therapy.

Paul TV(1), Asha HS, Thomas N, Seshadri MS, Rupali P, Abraham OC, Pulimood SA,
Jose A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Christian Medical
College, Vellore, India. thomasvpaul@yahoo.com

OBJECTIVE: To study the vitamin D status and bone mineral density (BMD) in men
infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in a tertiary care center from
southern India.
METHODS: We conducted a cross-sectional study of 35 HIV-infected men (between 20 
and 50 years old) receiving highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) (group
1) in comparison with 35 age- and body mass index-matched HIV-positive
antiretroviral therapy-na√Øve men (group 2) and 35 HIV-negative healthy control
subjects (group 3).
RESULTS: A significantly greater proportion (P = .002) of patients (74%) in the
HAART group had vitamin D deficiency (<20 ng/mL) in comparison with the other 2
groups (37% in each group). The mean intact parathyroid hormone level was higher 
(P<.001) and the mean duration of exposure to sunlight was lower (P = .001) in
the HAART group than in the other 2 groups. By logistic regression analysis,
HAART was found to be significantly associated with vitamin D deficiency. The BMD
in the femoral neck was significantly lower in men with HIV infection who were
receiving HAART in comparison with the other 2 groups (P = .006). On multivariate
logistic regression, older age, low body mass index, and high parathyroid hormone
levels emerged as factors significantly associated with decreased BMD at the
femoral neck.
CONCLUSION: A significant proportion of patients receiving HAART had vitamin D
deficiency. The secondary hyperparathyroidism probably due to vitamin D
deficiency is an important contributing factor for the observed changes in BMD.
Vitamin D deficiency noted in this group is probably multifactorial, and further 
research is needed to determine whether the effect of HAART on vitamin D
metabolism is an additional causative factor and what benefit vitamin D
supplementation might confer in these patients.

DOI: 10.4158/EP09197.OR 
PMID: 20150027  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
