

2584. Mol Med Rep. 2017 Feb;15(2):696-702. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2016.6085. Epub 2016 Dec
29.

Downregulation of mouse CCR3 by lentiviral shRNA inhibits proliferation and
induces apoptosis of mouse eosinophils.

Zhu XH(1), Liao B(2), Xu Y(1), Liu K(1), Huang Y(1), Huang QL(1), Liu YH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, The Second Affiliated
Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi 330006, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, The Tumor Hospital of Jiangxi Province,
Nanchang, Jiangxi 330006, P.R. China.

RNA interference has been considered as an effective gene silencing method in
basic and preclinical investigations. The aims of the present study were to
construct a lentiviral vector expressing a short hairpin RNA (shRNA) targeting
the murine CC chemokine receptor 3 (mCCR3), and to investigate its effects on the
proliferation and apoptosis of mouse eosinophils. A recombinant lentiviral vector
expressing four fragments of mouse CCR3 shRNA (pLVX‑mCCR3‑1+2+3+4‑shRNA) was
constructed using subcloning techniques. This novel lentivirus was then packaged 
into 293T cells by co‑transduction with plasmids, including Baculo p35, pCMV R8.2
and VSV. The interference effects of the vector were verified using polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) and western blot analyses. The effects of the interference
on the proliferation and apoptosis of mouse eosinophils were investigated using
3‑(4,5‑dimethylthiazol‑2‑yl)‑5‑(3‑carboxymethoxyphenyl)‑2‑(4‑sulfophenyl)‑2H‑tetr
azolium and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling methods,
respectively. The results of the PCR and western blot analyses confirmed that the
novel recombinant vector, pLVX‑mCCR3‑1+2+3+4‑shRNA, had high efficiency in
inhibiting the mRNA and protein expression levels of mCCR3 in mouse eosinophils. 
The downregulation of mCCR3 significantly inhibited proliferation of the
eosinophils. Furthermore, the present study found that the downregulation of
mCCR3 significantly promoted apoptosis of the eosinophils. Therefore, the
downregulation of mCCR3 led to the inhibition of proliferation and induction of
apoptosis in mouse eosinophils. The predominant characteristics of allergic
rhinitis are eosinophil infiltration and release of inflammatory mediators, which
appear in a variety of clinical manifestations. The results of the present study 
indicate that mCCR3 silencing may serve as a putative approach for the treatment 
of allergic rhinitis.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2016.6085 
PMCID: PMC5364839
PMID: 28035394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
