

2587. Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2013 Feb;36(1):1-7. doi: 10.1007/s13402-012-0122-4. Epub 2013
Jan 22.

miRNAs in head and neck cancer revisited.

Nagadia R(1), Pandit P, Coman WB, Cooper-White J, Punyadeera C.

Author information: 
(1)The Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, The University
of Queensland, St Lucia, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most
common cause of cancer mortality in the world and the 5th most commonly occurring
cancer. Tobacco smoking, alcohol consumption and human papilloma virus (HPV)
infections have been associated with the occurrence of HNSCC. Despite advances
that have been made in HNSCC treatment, smoking-associated HNSCC patients still
exhibit a poor 5 year survival rate (30-50 %) and a concomitant poor quality of
life. The major clinical challenge to date lies in the early detection of
dysplastic lesions,which can progress to malignancy. In addition, there are
currently no tools available to monitor HNSCC patients for early stages of local 
recurrences or distant metastases. In the recent past, micro-RNAs (miRNA) have
been assessed for their role in cancer initiation and progression, including
HNSCC. It is now well-established that deregulation of these single stranded,
small non-coding, 19-25 nt RNAs can e.g. enhance the expression of oncogenes or
subdue the expression of tumor suppressor genes. The aims of this review are
three-fold: first to retrieve from the literature miRNAs that have specifically
been associated with HNSCC, second to group these miRNAs into those regulating
tumor initiation, progression and metastasis, and third to discern miRNAs related
to smoking-associated HNSCC versus HPV-associated HNSCC development.
CONCLUSIONS: This review gives an overview on the miRNAs regulating the
development of head and neck cancers. The ultimate establishment of miRNA
expression profiles that are HNSCC specific, and miRNAs that orchestrate altered 
gene and protein expression levels in HNSCC, could pave the way for a better
understanding of the mechanism underlying its pathogenesis and the development of
novel, targeted therapies.

DOI: 10.1007/s13402-012-0122-4 
PMID: 23338821  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
