

2589. Cancer Res. 2009 Jul 1;69(13):5505-13. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-4311. Epub
2009 Jun 23.

Expression of WSX1 in tumors sensitizes IL-27 signaling-independent natural
killer cell surveillance.

Dibra D(1), Cutrera JJ, Xia X, Birkenbach MP, Li S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biomedical Sciences, Louisiana State University,
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70803, USA.

It is well known that the interleukin (IL)-27 receptor WSX1 is expressed in
immune cells and induces an IL-27-dependent immune response. Opposing this
conventional dogma, this study reveals a much higher level of WSX1 expression in 
multiple types of epithelial tumor cells when compared with normal epithelial
cells. Expression of exogenous WSX1 in epithelial tumor cells suppresses
tumorigenicity in vitro and inhibits tumor growth in vivo. Different from the
role of WSX1 in immune cells, the antitumor activity of WSX1 in epithelial tumor 
cells is independent of IL-27 signaling but is mainly dependent on natural killer
(NK) cell surveillance. Deficiency of either the IL-27 subunit EBV-induced gene 3
or the IL-27 receptor WSX1 in the host animals had no effect on tumor growth
inhibition induced by WSX1 expression in tumor cells. Expression of WSX1 in
epithelial tumor cells enhances NK cell cytolytic activity against tumor cells,
whereas the absence of functional NK cells impairs the WSX1-mediated inhibition
of epithelial tumor growth. The underlying mechanism by which WSX1 expression in 
tumor cells enhances NK cytolytic activity is dependent on up-regulation of NKG2D
ligand expression. Our results reveal an IL-27-independent function of WSX1:
sensitizing NK cell-mediated antitumor surveillance via a NKG2D-dependent
mechanism.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-4311 
PMCID: PMC2706921
PMID: 19549909  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
