

2590. EBioMedicine. 2017 Mar;17:223-236. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2017.02.025. Epub 2017
Mar 1.

Identification of an atypical etiological head and neck squamous carcinoma
subtype featuring the CpG island methylator phenotype.

Brennan K(1), Koenig JL(1), Gentles AJ(1), Sunwoo JB(2), Gevaert O(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Stanford University, United States.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Stanford University,
United States.
(3)Department of Medicine, Stanford University, United States. Electronic
address: ogevaert@stanford.edu.

Comment in
    EBioMedicine. 2017 Mar;17 :22-23.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is broadly classified into HNSCC
associated with human papilloma virus (HPV) infection, and HPV negative HNSCC,
which is typically smoking-related. A subset of HPV negative HNSCCs occur in
patients without smoking history, however, and these etiologically 'atypical'
HNSCCs disproportionately occur in the oral cavity, and in female patients,
suggesting a distinct etiology. To investigate the determinants of clinical and
molecular heterogeneity, we performed unsupervised clustering to classify 528
HNSCC patients from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) into putative intrinsic
subtypes based on their profiles of epigenetically (DNA methylation) deregulated 
genes. HNSCCs clustered into five subtypes, including one HPV positive subtype,
two smoking-related subtypes, and two atypical subtypes. One atypical subtype was
particularly genomically stable, but featured widespread gene silencing
associated with the 'CpG island methylator phenotype' (CIMP). Further
distinguishing features of this 'CIMP-Atypical' subtype include an antiviral gene
expression profile associated with pro-inflammatory M1 macrophages and CD8+ T
cell infiltration, CASP8 mutations, and a well-differentiated state corresponding
to normal SOX2 copy number and SOX2OT hypermethylation. We developed a gene
expression classifier for the CIMP-Atypical subtype that could classify atypical 
disease features in two independent patient cohorts, demonstrating the
reproducibility of this subtype. Taken together, these findings provide
unprecedented evidence that atypical HNSCC is molecularly distinct, and
postulates the CIMP-Atypical subtype as a distinct clinical entity that may be
caused by chronic inflammation.

Copyright Â© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2017.02.025 
PMCID: PMC5360591
PMID: 28314692  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
