

2591. Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2017 Sep;13(9):897-906. doi:
10.1080/1744666X.2017.1333423. Epub 2017 Jun 15.

Allergen immunotherapy in allergic rhinitis: current use and future trends.

Klimek L(1), Pfaar O(1)(2), Bousquet J(3)(4), Senti G(5), Kündig T(6).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Otorhinolaryngology , Allergy Center , Wiesbaden , Germany.
(2)b Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery,
Universitätsmedizin Mannheim, Medical Faculty Mannheim , Heidelberg University , 
Mannheim , Germany.
(3)c MACVIA-France , Contre les MAladies Chroniques pour un VIeillissement Actif 
en France European Innovation Partnership on Active and Healthy Ageing Reference 
Site , Montpellier , France.
(4)d INSERM U 1168 , VIMA: Ageing and chronic diseases Epidemiological and public
health approaches, Villejuif, Université Versailles St-Quentin-en-Yvelines ,
Montigny le Bretonneux , France.
(5)e Center for Clinical Trials , Zurich University Hospital , Zurich ,
Switzerland.
(6)f Dept. of Dermatology , Zurich University Hospital , Zurich , Switzerland.

INTRODUCTION: Type-1 allergies are among the most chronic common diseases of
humans. Allergen immunotherapy (AIT) is the only causative and disease-modifying 
treatment option besides allergen avoidance. Severe systemic adverse allergic
reactions may be induced by every AIT treatment. Different approaches have been
used to provide safer AIT preparations to lower or even totally overcome this
risk. Areas covered: A structured literature recherche in Medline and Pubmed
under inclusion of national and international guidelines and Cochrane
meta-analyses has been performed aiming at reviewing clinical use of such
approaches in AIT. New allergen preparations may include allergoids, recombinant 
allergens (recA) and modified recombinant allergens (recA) in subcutaneous as
well as in mucosal immunotherapies (application e.g. using bronchial, nasal, oral
and sublingual application) with sublingual being the established mucosal
application route and new ways of application like intralymphatic and
epicutaneous immunotherapy. Expert commentary: Immune-modifying agents like
Virus-like particles and CpG-motifs, adjuvants like MPL and aluminum hydroxide
are evaluated and found to increase and direct the immunological response toward 
immunological tolerance. New forms of allergen extracts can improve safety and
efficacy of AIT and may change our way of performing allergen immunotherapy in
the future.

DOI: 10.1080/1744666X.2017.1333423 
PMID: 28532268  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
