

2599. Head Neck Pathol. 2012 Jul;6 Suppl 1:S121-8. doi: 10.1007/s12105-012-0361-8. Epub
2012 Jul 3.

Future directions in research, treatment and prevention of HPV-related squamous
cell carcinoma of the head and neck.

Psyrri A(1), Sasaki C, Vassilakopoulou M, Dimitriadis G, Rampias T.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Department of Internal Medicine, Attikon Hospital, National Kapodistrian
University of Athens, 12462 Athens, Greece. psyrri237@yahoo.com

The causative relationship between high-risk HPV and OSCC is well-established.
HPV-associated OSCC represents a distinct disease entity compared to
tobacco-associated ones. These virus-associated cancers continuously express the 
HPV E6 and E7 viral oncogenes even in advanced stages, and repression of viral
oncogene expression can prevent the growth or survival of cancer cells. This
finding raises the possibility that even late-stage HPV-associated OSCC can be
cured by HPV-targeted approaches, such as medicines that interfere with the
expression or function of viral oncoproteins, and therapeutic vaccines that
elicit a cytolytic immune response to cells expressing these oncoproteins. The
demonstration that high-risk HPVs are causally associated with a subset of OSCC
has allowed the development of preventive and therapeutic strategies aimed at
reducing the incidence and mortality of this disease. The better outcome of
HPV-associated OSCC raises the question as to whether similar results can be
achieved with less treatment. An important aim of novel approaches for
favorable-prognosis, HPV-associated cancers will be minimization of devastating
side effects of intensified treatment developed for poor prognostic subsets.
Clinical trials are studying the potential for de-escalation of radiation therapy
in HPV + OSCC in the setting of different chemoradiotherapy regimens. The role of
cetuximab in HPV-associated OSCC needs to be explored in prospective clinical
trials. This review summarizes the main events of HPV-induced carcinogenesis with
an emphasis on the implications of these carcinogenic mechanisms on research,
treatment and prevention of HPV-associated OSCC.

DOI: 10.1007/s12105-012-0361-8 
PMCID: PMC3394158
PMID: 22782231  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
