

26. Methods Mol Biol. 2015;1238:369-79. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-1804-1_20.

Human papilloma virus (HPV) modulation of the HNSCC epigenome.

Stephen JK(1), Worsham MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, Henry Ford Hospital, 1
Ford Place, 1D, Detroit, MI, 48202, USA.

Currently, the human papilloma virus (HPV), in addition to tobacco and alcohol,
is considered another independent risk factor for oropharyngeal squamous head and
neck cancer (OPSCC), where the prevalence of HPV-16 increases to 50-90 % for the 
oropharynx. Also, incidence and mortality in head and neck SCC (HNSCC) continue
to be higher in African Americans (AA) than in Caucasian Americans (CA). A recent
study found that poorer survival outcomes for AA versus CA with oropharyngeal
tumors were attributable to racial differences in the prevalence of HPV positive 
(+) tumors; HPV negative (-) AA and CA patients had similar outcomes (Settle et
al., Cancer Prev Res (Phila) 2:776-781, 2009). Evidence indicates that a
HPV+ diagnosis has significant prognostic implications; these patients have at
least half the risk of death when compared with the HPV- patient, due in part to 
a better response to chemoradiotherapy (Fakhry et al., J Natl Cancer Inst
100:261-269, 2008).Epigenetic events of promoter hypermethylation are emerging as
promising molecular strategies for cancer detection, representing tumor-specific 
markers occurring early in tumor progression. HPV infection is now recognized to 
play a role in the pathogenesis of OPSCC, where HPV+ and HPV- patients appear to 
be clinically and biologically distinct with reported genome-wide hypomethylation
and promoter hypermethylation in HPV+ HNSCC tumors. A recent study from our group
applying pathway analysis to investigate the biological role of the
differentially methylated genes in HPV+ and HPV- HNSCC reported 8 signal
transduction pathways germane to HNSCC (Worsham et al., Otolaryngol Head Neck
Surg 149:409-416, 2013).

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-1804-1_20 
PMID: 25421671  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
