

2602. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Apr 15;7(5):2454-61. eCollection 2014.

Aberrant SATB1 expression is associated with Epstein-Barr virus infection,
metastasis and survival in human nasopharyngeal cells and endemic nasopharyngeal 
carcinoma.

Deng YF(1), Zhou DN(2), Pan ZY(3), Yin P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Zhongshan Hospital, Xiamen
University Xiamen, Fujian 361004, China ; Department of Otolaryngology-Head and
Neck Surgery, Union School of Clinical Medicine, Fujian Medical University
Fuzhou, Fujian 350001, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Zhongshan Hospital, Xiamen University Xiamen, Fujian 
361004, China.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Union School of Clinical
Medicine, Fujian Medical University Fuzhou, Fujian 350001, China.

Special AT-rich sequence-binding protein 1 (SATB1) has been identified as a key
factor in the progression of some cancers, functioning as a global genome
organizer and chromatin regulator. We examined the levels of SATB1 mRNA
expression in NPC cell lines 5-8F (high metastasis) and 6-10B (low metastasis)
and immortalized human nasopharyngeal epithelial cells NP69-SV40T by quantitative
real-time PCR. We also examined the protein expression levels of SATB1 in 72
cases of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) tissues and 30 cases of normal
nasopharyngeal (NNP) tissues by immunohistochemistry, and then assessed the
correlations between SATB1 expression and clinicopathological factors. The
expression level of SATB1 mRNA in 5-8F was much higher than those in 6-10B and
NP69-SV40T (P<0.05). The expression level of SATB1 mRNA in 6-10B was higher than 
in NP69-SV40T, but the difference was not statistically significant (P>0.05). The
positive expression rates of SATB1 protein in NPC (38/72, 52.8%) were
significantly higher than in NNP (4/30, 13.3%) (P<0.05). SATB1 protein levels in 
NPC were not associated with gender, age, and T stage (P>0.05), but positively
correlated with the titers of EBVCA-IgA, metastasis (N and M stage), recurrence, 
and survival (P<0.05). Multivariate analysis showed that the overexpression of
SATB1 protein is an independent prognostic factor for NPC. The expression levels 
of SATB1 were obviously upregulated in primary NPC tissues and human NPC cell
lines. Therefore, SATB1 may be a valuable predictor in assessing the metastasis, 
recurrence, and prognosis of NPC.


PMCID: PMC4069958
PMID: 24966956  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
