

2603. Oncol Res Treat. 2015;38(11):570-6. doi: 10.1159/000441344. Epub 2015 Oct 21.

Impact of p16 Alterations and Pretreatment Anemia on Toxicity in Head and Neck
Cancer Patients Undergoing Definitive Radiochemotherapy.

Becker-Schiebe M(1), Sperling M, Pinkert U, Hoffmann W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiotherapy and Radio-Oncology, Klinikum Braunschweig, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Human papilloma virus (HPV) infection, p16 expression and hypoxia may
play important roles in the carcinogenesis, treatment response and toxicities of 
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). The aim of this analysis was to
assess whether there is any correlation between pre-radiotherapy (RT) anemia, p16
expression and toxicities and local control for patients undergoing definitive
therapy.
METHODS: 79 HNSCC patients who had undergone radiochemotherapy (RCT) or
RT-antibody therapy were retrospectively analyzed. p16 (INK4A) expression was
detected by immunohistochemical analysis. Factors predisposing for acute side
effects were examined by uni- and multivariate analysis.
RESULTS: p16 overexpression was detected in 32 cases. Pretreatment anemia was
present in one third of patients. Only 5% of patients were characterized by both 
pre-RT anemia and p16 overexpression. p16 expression was significantly associated
with acute grade 3 toxicity. 47% of p16-positive patients developed grade ≥ 3
radiodermatitis compared to 26% of p16-negative patients (p = 0.04). A reduced
risk of severe skin toxicities was noted for patients with hypoxic blood values
before RT. p16 expression was significantly correlated with local control (p =
0.002).
CONCLUSIONS: p16 expression is associated with better response to definitive
combined treatment (RCT, RT + cetuximab), but also significantly related to acute
high-grade toxicity.

© 2015 S. Karger GmbH, Freiburg.

DOI: 10.1159/000441344 
PMID: 26599270  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
