

2606. Laryngoscope. 2011 Nov;121(11):2349-58. doi: 10.1002/lary.22186. Epub 2011 Oct
12.

Management of the "violated neck" in the era of chemoradiation.

Loyo M(1), Johnson JT, Westra WH, Chiosea SI, Gourin CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland 21287, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To determine if patients who have undergone an open neck biopsy (a
"violated" neck) have improved disease control and survival with completion neck 
dissection.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Retrospective review of patients who underwent open
cervical biopsy for diagnosis prior to definitive treatment between February 1997
and February 2010 at two academic tertiary referral centers.
RESULTS: Ninety-four patients met study criteria, with completion neck dissection
performed in 53 patients (56%). The majority of patients (84%) had oropharyngeal 
tumors. Human papilloma virus (HPV) status was positive in 55 of 63 patients
(87%). Chemotherapy was used more often in patients treated nonoperatively (88%) 
compared to patients who underwent neck dissection (49%; P < .001). Five-year
disease-specific survival (DSS) was 84% for patients treated with neck dissection
and 82% for nonoperative treatment (P = .5806), and disease-free survival (DFS)
was 82% for patients treated with neck dissection and 70% for nonoperative
treatment (P = .6047). Five-year DSS was 84% for patients with HPV-positive
disease and 63% for HPV-negative disease (P = .0086), and DFS was 79% for
HPV-positive disease and 50% for HPV-negative disease (P = .0004). Only advanced 
primary tumor (T3/T4) stage (hazard ratio [HR] = 8.8, P = .004) was associated
with DSS, whereas advanced primary tumor stage (HR = 5.3, P = .008), N3 disease
(HR = 5.6, P = .036), and HPV-positive disease (HR = 0.2, P = .032) were
significant predictors of DFS, after controlling for all other variables.
CONCLUSIONS: In the era of chemoradiation, completion neck dissection following
an open cervical biopsy does not appear to provide a survival advantage. A high
proportion of HPV-positive oropharyngeal tumors may explain the favorable
outcomes observed.

Copyright Â© 2011 The American Laryngological, Rhinological, and Otological
Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.22186 
PMID: 21993776  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
