

2610. Int J Cancer. 2012 Jan 1;130(1):48-58. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25969. Epub 2011 May 25.

Monocytes enhance cell proliferation and LMP1 expression of nasal natural
killer/T-cell lymphoma cells by cell contact-dependent interaction through
membrane-bound IL-15.

Ishii H(1), Takahara M, Nagato T, Kis LL, Nagy N, Kishibe K, Harabuchi Y, Klein
E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Asahikawa Medical
University, Asahikawa, Japan.

Nasal natural killer (NK)/T-cell lymphoma (NNKTL) is an Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV)-related malignancy with poor prognosis and has distinct histological
features characterized by angiocentric and polymorphous lymphoreticular
infiltrates including inflammatory cells such as granulocytes, monocytes,
macrophages and lymphocytes. Here, we show that the monocytes enhance
proliferation as well as LMP1 expression of NNKTL cells by cell contact-dependent
interaction through membrane-bound interleukin (IL)-15. We used two EBV-positive 
NK-cell lines, SNK6 and KAI3, which originated from two patients-SNK6 from a
patient with NNKTL and KAI3 from a patient with a severe mosquito allergy. We
cocultured the cell lines with granulocytes or monocytes and examined whether
proliferation, survival and LMP1 expression of the cells changed. Although
cocultured granulocytes did not affect proliferation, survival or LMP1 expression
of the cells, cocultured monocytes enhanced both proliferation and LMP1
expression in a dose-dependent manner. These phenomena were not seen when
monocytes were placed in a separate chamber. Moreover, the monocyte-inducible
proliferation and LMP1 expression were inhibited by treatment with an antibody
against IL-15. Furthermore, production of interferon-gamma-inducible protein
(IP)-10 were enhanced by coculture with monocytes and were inhibited by the
antibody. Immunohistological studies confirmed that a number of infiltrating
CD14-positive monocytes contacted CD56-positive lymphoma cells in all of 20 NNKTL
tissues tested. These results suggest that monocytes enhance cell growth as well 
as LMP1 expression of NNKTL cells by cell contact-dependent interaction through
membrane-bound IL-15. In the microenvironment of NNKTL tissue, a positive
feedback loop of interaction between lymphoma cells and monocytes may be present 
and contribute to lymphoma progression.

Copyright Â© 2011 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.25969 
PMID: 21618217  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
