

2612. Int J Biol Macromol. 2018 Apr 15;110:582-587. doi:
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2017.12.145. Epub 2017 Dec 29.

Recombinant expression of extracellular domain of mutant Epidermal Growth Factor 
Receptor in prokaryotic and baculovirus expression systems.

Vettath SK(1), Shivashankar G(1), Menon KN(2), Vijayachandran LS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Nanosciences and Molecular Medicine, Amrita Institute of Medical
Sciences and Research Centre, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Kochi, Kerala 682041,
India.
(2)Centre for Nanosciences and Molecular Medicine, Amrita Institute of Medical
Sciences and Research Centre, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Kochi, Kerala 682041,
India. Electronic address: Krishnakumarmenon@aims.amrita.edu.
(3)Centre for Nanosciences and Molecular Medicine, Amrita Institute of Medical
Sciences and Research Centre, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Kochi, Kerala 682041,
India. Electronic address: lakshmisumitra@aims.amrita.edu.

Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor variant III (EGFRvIII) is a tumor specific
antigen detected in various tumors including gliomas, breast cancer, lung cancer,
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Screening of EGFRvIII targeting
drug molecules can be accelerated by developing drug screening platforms using
recombinantly expressed protein. Choice of expression system is one of the major 
factors deciding the success of recombinant expression of a protein. In our
study, we have tried to express and purify the extracellular domain (ECD) of this
highly unstable protein using bacterial and baculovirus expression systems to
select the expression system suited for our purpose. Even though the protein was 
successfully expressed in prokaryotic system, purification could be done only
under denaturing conditions. But in the baculovirus expression system, the
protein was expressed in soluble form and could be purified under native
conditions, with single step of purification. Based on our results, we conclude
that insect cells are better choice over E. coli cells for expressing EGFRvIII
ECD in soluble form. This study provides insights for other researchers involved 
in expression of similar unstable membrane proteins, on selecting the best
expression system and challenges involved.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2017.12.145 
PMID: 29292145  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
