

2615. Head Neck Pathol. 2012 Jul;6 Suppl 1:S75-82. doi: 10.1007/s12105-012-0369-0. Epub
2012 Jul 3.

p16 Immunohistochemistry as a standalone test for risk stratification in
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma.

Lewis JS Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University in St Louis,
Campus Box 8118, 660 South Euclid Ave, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.
jlewis@path.wustl.edu

It is widely acknowledged that human papillomavirus (HPV)-related oropharyngeal
carcinoma is a biologically unique form of head and neck cancer that should be
singled out and treated differently. It is now incumbent to find a test (or
combination of tests) that accurately identifies cancers with the associated
favorable prognosis for proper patient counseling and management and for placing 
patients in the correct treatment arms in the emerging clinical trials that are
attempting to establish unique treatment types and approaches. The test (or
combination of tests) that are utilized must be widely available, reliable, easy 
to interpret, and well-validated. While HPV-specific testing seems completely
logical to use as a single test or one of a combination of tests, it turns out to
be quite complicated in practice. Because of the different forms of the virus,
the differing types of HPV-specific tests can give different information. HPV
DNA, RNA, and protein assays have varying sensitivities for virus detection and
also varying availability from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue. Since
p16 protein over expression is very sensitive for the presence of
transcriptionally-active HPV and since it correlates strongly with patient
outcomes, is widely available, and easy to interpret, it appears to currently be 
the single test that combines all of the desired attributes in a risk
stratification marker for widespread implementation in clinical and research
study settings. This article will review the literature on p16
immunohistochemistry and its relation to HPV-specific testing, discuss some
practical issues related to its implementation, and present the case for why it
should be the single test used for this purpose.

DOI: 10.1007/s12105-012-0369-0 
PMCID: PMC3394161
PMID: 22782226  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
