

2618. Expert Opin Drug Saf. 2016 Nov;15(11):1527-1539. Epub 2016 Sep 9.

Safety of drug treatments for head and neck cancer.

Galot R(1), Machiels JP(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Medical Oncology, Institut Roi Albert II, Cliniques
universitaires Saint-Luc and Institut de Recherche Clinique et Expérimentale
(Pole MIRO) , Université catholique de Louvain , Brussels , Belgium.

INTRODUCTION: The treatment of squamous cell carcinoma of the head and the neck
depends on the disease's stage. In locally-advanced stage disease, multimodal
treatment strategies, including surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy, give the 
best outcome in terms of overall survival. Those treatments are not without
negligeable adverse events, which can lead to late debilitating toxicities. In
recurrent/metastatic disease, not amenable to surgery or radiation therapy,
palliative chemotherapy is the most appropriate treatment. Areas covered: This
review aims to provide an overview of the safety of standard drug regimens used
to treat SCCHN in daily practice, including platinum-based chemoradiation,
induction chemotherapy, cetuximab and immunotherapy. The toxicities induced by
single modality radiotherapy, or those resulting from surgery, are not part of
the discussion. Expert opinion: Toxicities observed with multimodal treatment of 
SCCHN are the highest we can tolerate in terms of treatment-related mortality,
morbidity and late consequences. Patients at high risk of developing such
complications should be identified upfront for optimal prevention and management.
There is a medical need to identify less toxic regimens without compromising the 
treatment efficacy, especially for patients with Human Papilloma Virus-induced
oropharyngeal cancers. Finally, it is crucial in future trials to better
standardize the scales used to report treatment related adverse events.

DOI: 10.1080/14740338.2016.1227789 
PMID: 27561463  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
