

2626. Oncotarget. 2014 Oct 15;5(19):8906-23.

The head and neck cancer cell oncogenome: a platform for the development of
precision molecular therapies.

Martin D(1), Abba MC(2), Molinolo AA(1), Vitale-Cross L(1), Wang Z(1), Zaida
M(1), Delic NC(3), Samuels Y(4), Lyons JG(3), Gutkind JS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Oral and Pharyngeal Cancer Branch, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
USA.
(2)CINIBA, Facultad de Ciencias Médicas, Universidad Nacional de La Plata, La
Plata, Argentina.
(3)Dermatology, University of Sydney, Camperdown, Australia. Cancer Services,
Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Camperdown, Australia.
(4)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, The Weizmann Institute of Science,
Rehovot, Israel.

The recent elucidation of the genomic landscape of head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) has provided a unique opportunity to develop selective cancer
treatment options. These efforts will require the establishment of relevant HNSCC
models for preclinical testing. Here, we performed full exome and transcriptome
sequencing of a large panel of HNSCC-derived cells from different anatomical
locations and human papillomavirus (HPV) infection status. These cells exhibit
typical mutations in TP53, FAT1, CDK2NA, CASP8, and NOTCH1, and copy number
variations (CNVs) and mutations in PIK3CA, HRAS, and PTEN that reflect the
widespread activation of the PI3K-mTOR pathway. SMAD4 alterations were observed
that may explain the decreased tumor suppressive effect of TGF-β in HNSCC.
Surprisingly, we identified HPV+ HNSCC cells harboring TP53 mutations, and
documented aberrant TP53 expression in a subset of HPV+ HNSCC cases. This
analysis also revealed that most HNSCC cells harbor multiple mutations and CNVs
in epigenetic modifiers (e.g., EP300, CREBP, MLL1, MLL2, MLL3, KDM6A, and KDM6B) 
that may contribute to HNSCC initiation and progression. These
genetically-defined experimental HNSCC cellular systems, together with the
identification of novel actionable molecular targets, may now facilitate the
pre-clinical evaluation of emerging therapeutic agents in tumors exhibiting each 
precise genomic alteration.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.2417 
PMCID: PMC4253406
PMID: 25275298  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
