

263. Sci Rep. 2016 Jun 24;6:28294. doi: 10.1038/srep28294.

Divergent viral presentation among human tumors and adjacent normal tissues.

Cao S(1), Wendl MC(1)(2)(3), Wyczalkowski MA(1), Wylie K(1)(4), Ye K(1)(2),
Jayasinghe R(1)(5), Xie M(1)(5), Wu S(1), Niu B(1), Grubb R 3rd(6), Johnson
KJ(7), Gay H(8), Chen K(9), Rader JS(10), Dipersio JF(5)(8), Chen F(5)(8), Ding
L(1)(2)(5)(8).

Author information: 
(1)McDonnell Genome Institute, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri 63108, 
USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri 63108, USA.
(3)Department of Mathematics, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri 63108,
USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri 63108,
USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri 63108, USA.
(6)Department of Surgery, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri 63108, USA.
(7)Brown School Master of Public Health Program, Washington University in St.
Louis, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA.
(8)Siteman Cancer Center, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri 63108, USA.
(9)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Department of
Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.
(10)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical College of Wisconsin,
Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

We applied a newly developed bioinformatics system called VirusScan to
investigate the viral basis of 6,813 human tumors and 559 adjacent normal samples
across 23 cancer types and identified 505 virus positive samples with
distinctive, organ system- and cancer type-specific distributions. We found that 
herpes viruses (e.g., subtypes HHV4, HHV5, and HHV6) that are highly prevalent
across cancers of the digestive tract showed significantly higher abundances in
tumor versus adjacent normal samples, supporting their association with these
cancers. We also found three HPV16-positive samples in brain lower grade glioma
(LGG). Further, recurrent HBV integration at the KMT2B locus is present in three 
liver tumors, but absent in their matched adjacent normal samples, indicating
that viral integration induced host driver genetic alterations are required on
top of viral oncogene expression for initiation and progression of liver
hepatocellular carcinoma. Notably, viral integrations were found in many genes,
including novel recurrent HPV integrations at PTPN13 in cervical cancer. Finally,
we observed a set of HHV4 and HBV variants strongly associated with ethnic
groups, likely due to viral sequence evolution under environmental influences.
These findings provide important new insights into viral roles of tumor
initiation and progression and potential new therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.1038/srep28294 
PMCID: PMC4919655
PMID: 27339696  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
