

2631. Niger J Med. 2010 Oct-Dec;19(4):395-9.

Frequency of cryptococcal meningitis in HIV-1 infected patients in north central 
Nigeria.

Gomerep SS(1), Idoko JA, Ladep NG, Ugoya SO, Obaseki D, Agbaji OA, Agaba P,
Akanbi MO, Badung BP, Otitoloju O.

Author information: 
(1)APIN-PLUS/PEPFAR HARVARD, Jos University teaching Hospital, Jos, Nigeria.
simjoma@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Cryptococcal meningitis (CM) is the most common severe life
threatening fungal infection in AIDS patients. It is an important cause of
morbidity and mortality There is paucity of data on the prevalence of CM in
Nigeria. We aimed to determine the frequency of CM, the clinical presentation and
immunological profile.
METHODS: A cross sectional study was carried out at the Jos University Teaching
Hospital (JUTH). A total of 100 HIV-1 infected patients suspected of having
meningitis or meningoencephalitis were subjected to cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
analysis (including Indian ink preparation and fungal culture by conventional
methods) and CD4 count was determined using flow cytometry (count bit Y-R 1004
Partec Muster Germany).
RESULTS: The freguency of CM was 36% in our cohort. The commonest clinical
presentation included headache (100.0%), neck stiffness (77.8%), fever (72.0%),
vomiting 55.6%), personality changes (55.6%), photophobia (27.8%) and convulsions
(27.8%). The mean duration of symptoms was 24 +/- 22 days with a median of 17
days. The mean CD4 count was 89 +/- 60 cells/mm3 with a median of 82 cells/mm3.
CONCLUSION: The high prevalence of CM and the associated severe immunosuppression
underscores the importance of early diagnosis of HIV infection which may reduce
the incidence of CM. There is the urgent need for access to Amphotericin B and
fluconazole in resource constrained settings in addition to a wide access to
HAART.


PMID: 21526627  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
