

2635. Am J Case Rep. 2018 Feb 19;19:183-186.

A Rare Presentation of Cryptococcal Meningitis and Cerebellitis in an Asplenic
Patient, Seronegative for Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV).

Abbas H(1), CiFuentes Kottkamp A(2), Abbas N(3), Cindrich R(4), Singh M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Bronx Lebanon Hospital Center, Bronx, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, New
York University School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Bronx Lebanon Hospital
Center, Bronx, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Bronx Lebanon
Hospital Center, Bronx, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND Cryptococcal meningitis in patients who are seronegative for the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and in patients who are splenectomized is rare. This
report is an unusual case of meningeal and cerebellar infection due to the
encapsulated yeast, Cryptococcus neoformans, which has not previously been
associated with asplenia. CASE REPORT A 65-year-old HIV-negative patient with a
previous splenectomy, presented with a three-day history of fever, vomiting, and 
headache. His symptoms progressed to generalized body aches, persistent fever,
and neck stiffness. A lumbar puncture was performed, and cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) culture grew Cryptococcus neoformans. Treatment commenced with intravenous 
amphotericin B and flucytosine. The patient required serial lumbar punctures due 
to persistent raised intracranial pressure (ICP). Magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) of the brain showed acute meningitis and cerebellitis. Antimicrobial
therapy and CSF drainage resulted in clinical improvement.Â  CONCLUSIONS The
occurrence of meningeal and cerebellar cryptococcosis in an asplenic patient is
rare, and few cases have been previously reported. This case report highlights
the possibility of invasive cryptococcal infection, or cryptococcosis, in
asplenic individuals in the absence of HIV infection.


PMCID: PMC5829552
PMID: 29456239  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
