

2637. Am J Pathol. 2014 May;184(5):1323-30. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2014.01.028.

Molecular heterogeneity of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma defined by
next-generation sequencing.

Zhang P(1), Mirani N(1), Baisre A(1), Fernandes H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Rutgers Biomedical and Health
Sciences-New Jersey Medical School, Newark, New Jersey.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Rutgers Biomedical and Health
Sciences-New Jersey Medical School, Newark, New Jersey. Electronic address:
hef9020@med.cornell.edu.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) can be divided into two different
clinical entities based on their association with high-risk subtypes of human
papilloma virus (HPV16 and HPV18). Dissimilarities in prognosis and molecular
profiles have attracted much attention in recent years, in part because of
increasing rates of HPV infection in HNSCC; however, the underlying mechanisms
and detailed genetic profiles that set these tumors apart are still elusive. To
elucidate oncogenic pathways in HNSCC with and without HPV infection, we used
targeted next-generation sequencing to interrogate single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in 50 cancer-related genes. We detected SNPs in 25 of these 
genes from HNSCC tissue specimens with and without HPV infection. In 5 of the 25 
genes, variant patterns were similar regardless of HPV infection status. A
greater number of sequence variants in genes from the tyrosine kinase receptors
and their associated pathways were preferentially present in HPV(+) specimens.
SNPs in genes related to tumor-suppressor functions were more prevalent in HPV(-)
HNSCC specimens. The observations may help to elucidate mechanisms involved in
the molecular pathogenesis of two clinically diverse subclasses of HNSCC.
Over-representation of SNPs in either HPV(+) or HPV(-) HNSCC is another indicator
of potentially actionable sequence variants for targeted therapy.

Copyright Â© 2014 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2014.01.028 
PMID: 24767105  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
