

2648. Cancer Causes Control. 2010 Sep;21(9):1369-78. doi: 10.1007/s10552-010-9564-z.
Epub 2010 Apr 17.

Tobacco and alcohol use increases the risk of both HPV-associated and
HPV-independent head and neck cancers.

Smith EM(1), Rubenstein LM, Haugen TH, Hamsikova E, Turek LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, College of Public Health, University of Iowa, Iowa
City, IA 52242, USA. elaine-smith@uiowa.edu

Tobacco, alcohol, and human papillomavirus (HPV) are major risk factors for head 
and neck cancer (HNC), but it is unclear whether there are two distinct HNC risk 
groups, one associated with HPV and the other with tobacco/alcohol. Because
HPV-positive HNC are clinically distinct from HPV-negative cases in treatment
response and with more favorable prognoses, determining whether these differences
result from infection alone or in association with other HNC risk factors is
important for developing future therapeutic strategies. Incident cases of HNC (n 
= 201) and age-gender frequency-matched controls (n = 324) were recruited to
assess anti-HPV VLP (virus like particles) antibodies 16, 18, 31, and 33.
Multivariate logistic regression and stratified analyses were used to calculate
adjusted odds ratios (OR). HPV-seronegative and seropositive/heavy tobacco users 
had similar increased adjusted risks of HNC (HPV-seronegative OR = 2.6, 1.4-5.0; 
HPV-seropositive OR = 2.3, 1.1-4.8), as did HPV-seronegative (OR = 4.3, 2.1-9.1) 
versus HPV-seropositive/heavy alcohol users (OR = 3.9, 1.6-9.4). Similar
HPV/tobacco/alcohol risk profiles also were seen in oropharyngeal and oral cavity
tumor sites. Our finding that tobacco/alcohol use increased the risk of HNC in
both HPV-seropositive and HPV-seronegative individuals is consistent with the
observation that HPV infection is not a sufficient cause of HNC but requires the 
accumulation of additional cellular changes.

DOI: 10.1007/s10552-010-9564-z 
PMID: 20401530  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
