

2653. Tumori. 2013 Sep-Oct;99(5):e208-10. doi: 10.1700/1377.15316.

Pharyngolaryngeal location of Kaposi's sarcoma with airway obstruction in an
HIV-negative patient.

Torretta S, Gaffuri M, Recalcati S, Marzano AV, Cantarella G, Iofrida E,
Pignataro L.

Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) is a human herpes virus-8 (HHV-8)-associated
angioproliferative disorder, and its occurrence may be favored by human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection and iatrogenic immunosuppression. It has
also been postulated that a chronic inflammatory disease of the skin can pave the
way to its development. KS generally involves mucosal and cutaneous sites,
including the head and neck. An oropharyngeal location is quite common, but
laryngeal involvement with possible upper airway obstruction and respiratory
distress requiring tracheotomy is rare, and no hypopharyngeal locations have yet 
been reported. We describe the case of a 68-year-old male patient who developed
KS after immunosuppressive treatment for pemphigus vulgaris, an autoimmune
bullous disease presenting with blisters and erosions on the skin and the oral
mucosa. KS was initially localized to the oral cavity and oropharynx, but
subsequent involvement of the laryngeal and hypopharyngeal tract led to acute
airway obstruction and the need for tracheotomy. This unique case of
pharyngolaryngeal KS suggests that clinicians faced with purple nodular lesions
should consider a differential diagnosis of KS in immunocompromised patients,
even if they are HIV negative, and should carefully manage the patency of the
upper airways.

DOI: 10.1700/1377.15316 
PMID: 24362871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
