

2656. Psychosom Med. 2016 Jan;78(1):38-48. doi: 10.1097/PSY.0000000000000256.

Depression and Oropharynx Cancer Outcome.

Shinn EH(1), Valentine A, Jethanandani A, Basen-Engquist K, Fellman B, Urbauer D,
Atkinson E, Yusuf SW, Lenihan D, Woods ML, Kies MS, Sood AK, Carmack C, Morrison 
WH, Gillenwater A, Sturgis EM, Garden AS.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Behavioral Science (Shinn, Jethanandani,
Basen-Engquist, Atkinson), Psychiatry (Valentine), Biostatistics (Fellman,
Urbauer), Cardiology (Yusuf, Woods), Thoracic Medical Oncology (Kies),
Gynecologic Oncology and Reproductive Medicine, Cancer Biology (Sood), Palliative
Care (Carmack), Radiation Oncology (Morrison, Garden), and Head and Neck Cancer
Surgery (Gillenwater, Sturgis), University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas; and Department of Cardiology (Lenihan), Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee.

BACKGROUND: Studies have shown a modest relationship between depression and
mortality in patients with cancer. Our study addressed methodological weaknesses 
in the literature by restricting the sample to patients with one cancer type,
adjusting for factors known to affect outcome, and following up patients for a
sufficient period.
METHODS: We prospectively followed patients newly diagnosed with squamous cell
oropharyngeal cancer from the start of radiation therapy until death or until
date of last clinical visit. All patients were optimally treated with radiation
and sometimes chemotherapy. After adjusting for tumor stage, treatment,
comorbidities, smoking, excessive alcohol use, and demographic factors, we
assessed the effects of baseline self-reported depression on overall survival and
recurrence.
RESULTS: One hundred thirty participants were followed for a median of 5 years.
The average age was 56 years, and 83% were male. Eighteen participants died
during the study and 15 experienced disease recurrence. Self-reported depression 
was associated with decreased overall survival duration (hazard ratio = 3.6, 95% 
confidence interval = 1.2-10.8) and disease recurrence (hazard ratio = 3.8, 95%
confidence interval = 1.2-12.2) in multivariate analysis. In addition, smoking
was associated with disease recurrence.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with oropharyngeal cancer may benefit from depression
screening and evidence-based treatments, if appropriate. Future studies are
needed to determine whether depression is an independent prognostic factor of
outcome and to elucidate biobehavioral mechanisms involved in patients with
oropharyngeal cancer.

DOI: 10.1097/PSY.0000000000000256 
PMCID: PMC4696911
PMID: 26632757  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
