

2660. Am J Med. 2012 Jul;125(7):S1. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2012.03.005.

HPV-beyond cervical cancer (online resource center).

Alexander KA(1), Giuliano AR.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, The University of Chicago, Illinois,
USA.

The human papillomavirus (HPV) causes more than 99% of all cervical cancers (see 
Am J Med Resource Center: http://supplements.amjmed.com/2011/HPV/). Exposure to
HPV infections occurs in a high proportion of the overall population; however, 2 
safe and effective vaccines, HPV2 and HPV4, are approved for the prevention of
HPV-16 and HPV-18 infection, the most common causes of cervical cancer.
Additionally, HPV4 prevents HPV-6 and HPV-11-related genital warts. While
prevention of cervical cancer in women has been the initial aim of vaccination
programs, it has now become apparent that HPV causes other types of cancer as
well, including vulvar and vaginal cancers in women, penile cancer in men, and
anal cancer in both sexes. Furthermore, these viruses have been implicated in
head and neck cancers in both men and women as well. It is estimated that
HPV-related cancers occur in 10,000 American males annually, suggesting that
limiting vaccination programs to females may be underserving a significant
proportion of the population. The efficacy of the 2 available vaccines against
oncogenic HPV is more than 90% for both cervical and anal intraepithelial
neoplasia. For those receiving the HPV4 vaccine, efficacy against genital warts
is nearly 90%. Adverse effects are few and include episodes of syncope in the
period immediately following vaccination. Benefits of vaccinating males include
reduction in disease burden in men and enhanced herd immunity to reduce disease
burden in women.

Copyright Â© 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2012.03.005 
PMID: 22727241  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
