

2666. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2015 Jul;272(7):1809-12. doi:
10.1007/s00405-014-3469-5. Epub 2015 Jan 25.

A prospective study of blood splatter in ENT.

Lakhani R(1), Loh Y, Zhang TT, Kothari P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of ENT and Head and Neck Surgery, St George's Hospital, Blackshaw
Rd, London, SW17 0QT, UK, drlakhani@doctors.org.uk.

Comment in
    Laryngorhinootologie. 2016 Mar;95(3):166-7.

Surgeons face an occupational risk of daily exposure to blood and body fluids.
Potential sources of infection include sharps injuries and mucocutaneous contact.
The transmission of blood-borne viruses, in particular human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV), Hepatitis B and Hepatitis C from the patient to healthcare workers
is well documented in the literature. We studied the incidence and degree of
blood splash in all otolaryngology (ENT) procedures undertaken in a single unit
over a 12 week period. In addition, we investigated which intraoperative factors 
might predict the degree of splash. We undertook a prospective, non-blinded study
of 102 patients undergoing a range of 'routine' elective ENT within one
department over 12 weeks. A surgical mask with visor attached was worn in all
procedures. Following each procedure, all splatter masks were collected and
examined macroscopically and microscopically for blood splash. In addition, the
procedure performed, technique used, total blood loss, operating time and grade
of surgeon was noted. 54% of procedures resulted in splash mask contamination.
The median number of splash spots per mask was 4.7 (range 0-63). Tonsillectomy
was the most commonly performed procedure, accounting for over one-third of total
procedures investigated. Each mask had an average of 8.2 splash marks.
Tonsillectomy had a splash rate of 76.9%. Although the risk of developing HIV is 
low the operating surgeon has a duty to take all precautions to protect
themselves during a procedure and therefore a protective mask and visor or
suitable goggles must be worn.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-014-3469-5 
PMID: 25617968  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
