

2667. Cancer Med. 2014 Oct;3(5):1185-96. doi: 10.1002/cam4.313. Epub 2014 Jul 26.

HPV-positive oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma is associated with TIMP3 and
CADM1 promoter hypermethylation.

van Kempen PM(1), van Bockel L, Braunius WW, Moelans CB, van Olst M, de Jong R,
Stegeman I, van Diest PJ, Grolman W, Willems SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, University Medical 
Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands; Brain Center Rudolf Magnus, University 
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) is associated with human
papillomavirus (HPV) in a proportion of tumors. HPV-positive OPSCC is considered 
a distinct molecular entity with a prognostic advantage compared to HPV-negative 
cases. Silencing of cancer-related genes by DNA promoter hypermethylation may
play an important role in the development of OPSCC. Hence, we examined promoter
methylation status in 24 common tumor suppressor genes in a group of 200 OPSCCs
to determine differentially methylated genes in HPV-positive versus HPV-negative 
primary OPSCC. Methylation status was correlated with HPV status, clinical
features, and patient survival using multivariate methods. Additionally,
methylation status of 16 cervical squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) was compared
with HPV-positive OPSCC. Using methylation-specific probe amplification,
HPV-positive OPSCC showed a significantly higher cumulative methylation index
(CMI) compared to HPV-negative OPSCC (P=0.008). For the genes CDH13, DAPK1, and
RARB, both HPV-positive and HPV-negative OPSCC showed promoter hypermethylation
in at least 20% of the tumors. HPV status was found to be an independent
predictor of promoter hypermethylation of CADM1 (P < 0.001), CHFR (P = 0.027),
and TIMP3 (P < 0.001). CADM1 and CHFR showed similar methylation patterns in
OPSCC and cervical SCC, but TIMP3 showed no methylation in cervical SCC in
contrast to OPSCC. Methylation status of neither individual gene nor CMI was
associated with survival. These results suggest that HPV-positive tumors are to a
greater extent driven by promotor hypermethylation in these tumor suppressor
genes. Especially CADM1 and TIMP3 are significantly more frequently
hypermethylated in HPV-positive OPSCC and CHFR in HPV-negative tumors.

© 2014 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cam4.313 
PMCID: PMC4302669
PMID: 25065733  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
