

2670. Int J Cancer. 2011 Aug 1;129(3):733-41. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25699. Epub 2010 Oct 26.

Trends in head and neck cancer incidence in Denmark, 1978-2007: focus on human
papillomavirus associated sites.

Blomberg M(1), Nielsen A, Munk C, Kjaer SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viruses, Hormones and Cancer, Institute of Cancer Epidemiology, 
Danish Cancer Society, Copenhagen, Denmark.

The aim of our study was to assess the overall trends in the incidence of
head-and-neck cancer (HNC) among Danish men and women in 1978-2007, to describe
the distribution and incidences of HNCs at different anatomical sites, and to
determine whether the incidence of human papillomavirus (HPV)-associated cancers 
is increasing. Data were extracted from the nationwide Cancer Registry database. 
To assess the possible impact of HPV infection, the sites of squamous cell
carcinomas were categorized as HPV-associated, potentially HPV-associated or
HPV-unrelated. In total, 26,474 incident cases were identified and the overall
incidence increased throughout the period. Significantly increasing incidence
rates were notably seen for tumors in the oral cavity (2.2% per year), tonsils
(4.8% per year), oropharynx (3.5% per year) and hypopharynx (4.4% per year). A
significantly decreasing incidence of lip cancer was observed among men (-5.0%
per year). Cancers at HPV-associated sites (n = 3650) showed strongly increasing 
incidence rates, primarily in individuals < 60 years. In contrast, HNCs at sites 
not related to HPV infection showed a significant decrease (in men) or virtually 
no change in incidence (in women). Our results suggest a marked impact of HPV
infection on the epidemiology of HNCs in Denmark. HPV16 is the type most often
found in HNCs; thus, the recent introduction of vaccination against HPV may in
the future prevent HPV-associated cancers of the head and neck.

Copyright Â© 2010 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.25699 
PMID: 20878955  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
