

2673. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2017 Nov;157(5):750-759. doi:
10.1177/0194599817707208. Epub 2017 May 23.

Posttransplant Lymphoproliferative Disorder: Otolaryngological Manifestations and
Management.

Heyes R(1), Northfelt DW(2), Lott DG(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Mayo Clinic
Arizona, Phoenix, Arizona, USA.
(2)2 Department of Medical Oncology, Mayo Clinic Arizona, Phoenix, Arizona, USA.

Objective Posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD) is a unifying term
for a spectrum of lymphoid expansion entities brought about by immunosuppression 
and is strongly associated with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Otolaryngological
findings tend to present early in the clinical course; therefore, disease
awareness among otolaryngologists is of utmost importance. This review
synthesizes the body of literature pertaining to PTLD involving the head and
neck, summarizes contemporary management, and highlights areas for future
research. Data Sources PubMed/Medline. Review Methods Primary literature search
of the Medline database was performed for all titles published in the past 10
years pertaining to PTLD. The database search included PTLD combined with a
collection of otolaryngological MeSH terms. Full manuscripts were reviewed based 
on relevance of their title and abstract. Selection into this review was
according to clinical and scientific relevance. Conclusion Adenotonsillar focus
is common in children in whom adenotonsillectomy may be diagnostic and prevents
potentially morbid airway obstruction. Sinonasal PTLD may mimic fungal infection.
Laryngotracheal involvement predominately presents in children with symptoms of
airway obstruction. PTLD limited to the esophagus is rare. Oral PTLD is rare and 
phenotypically varied. Cutaneous presentation of PTLD is infrequent, yet
one-third of cases affects the head and neck. PTLD may present as cervical
lymphadenopathy. Implications for Practice PTLD consideration is vital when
evaluating posttransplant patients. Children and EBV-seronegative patients should
receive otolaryngological follow-up after transplant. PTLD treatment is
multidisciplinary and typically led by lymphoma specialists. Formal partnerships 
between otolaryngologists and transplant centers may improve patient care and
research quality.

DOI: 10.1177/0194599817707208 
PMID: 28535360  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
