

2674. Hum Immunol. 2013 Dec;74(12):1563-74. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2013.08.272. Epub
2013 Aug 28.

Cell surface markers for T and B lymphocytes activation and adhesion as putative 
prognostic biomarkers for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Andrade MC(1), Ferreira SB, Gonçalves LC, De-Paula AM, de Faria ES,
Teixeira-Carvalho A, Martins-Filho OA.

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Estadual de Montes Claros (UNIMONTES), 39401-089 Montes Claros,
MG, Brazil. Electronic address: marileia@cpqrr.fiocruz.br.

The study population comprised HNSCC patients, risk-positive controls (tabagism
and alcoholism habits), and risk-negative controls (without risk factors).
Significant increases in the activation status of CD4(+)and CD8(+) T-cells, and
higher migration potentials of lymphocytes were observed in HNSCC patients
compared with control groups. Although decreased frequency of CD19(+)-B
lymphocytes was observed in HSNCC patients, a higher percentage of
HLA-DR(+)CD19(+)-B lymphocytes was detected in these individuals as compared with
other evaluated groups. Metastasis and tumor grading were the major pathological 
parameters associated with significant alterations in the expression of
activation molecules on circulating CD4(+) and CD8(+) T-cells. A reduced
frequency of CD38-expressing CD8(+) T-cells was the most relevant biomarker
associated with HNSCC aggressiveness. Performance analysis suggested a cut-off
point for the CD8(+)CD38(+)/CD8(+) T-cell ratio of 7.0 for segregating patients
according to tumor grading. In contrast, a higher proportion of
CD8(+)CD54(+)/CD8(+) T-cells could represent a relevant biomarker associated with
metastasis in HNSCC patients, and performance analysis suggested a cut-off point 
for the CD8(+)CD54(+)/CD8(+) T-cell ratio of 30 for segregating patients
according to absence or presence of metastasis. The results obtained can
increment immunological aspects of HNSCC and provide tools for the determination 
of cut-off scores of clinically relevant immunophenotypic prognostic biomarkers.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humimm.2013.08.272 
PMID: 23994583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
