

2676. Pathologe. 2014 Mar;35(2):143-51. doi: 10.1007/s00292-013-1846-2.

[The visionary concept of "lymphoepithelioma" by A. Schmincke in 1921. Subsequent
confusion over terminology and current approach to a solution].

[Article in German]

Ihrler S(1), Guntinas-Lichius O, Mollenhauer M.

Author information: 
(1)Labor für Dermatohistologie und Oralpathologie, Bayerstr. 69, 80335, München, 
Deutschland, Ihrler@dermpath-muenchen.de.

In 1921 Alexander Schmincke established the visionary concept of a clinically and
histomorphologically defined carcinoma entity of different lymphoepithelial
organs that he named "lymphoepithelioma". This nowadays mainly comprises
non-keratinizing oropharyngeal carcinomas frequently associated with human
papillomavirus (HPV) and non-keratinizing nasopharyngeal carcinomas mostly
associated with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). The term lymphoepithelioma was
originally defined by A. Schmincke and J. Ewing as a combined clinical and
histological tumor entity of lymphoepithelial organs. The main reason for the
longstanding terminological confusion regarding the term lymphoepithelioma is
based on the fact that lateron a pure histological interpretation
(lymphoepithelial differentiation) caused an artificial and nonreproducible
exclusion of tumors with transitional and basaloid differentiation. For the
forthcoming new WHO classification it has been suggested that squamous cell
carcinoma of the head and neck should no longer be classified according to the
heterogeneous histological differentiation but according to etiopathogenetic
criteria (e.g. HPV-related, EBV-related, nicotine and alcohol-related). This
proposed classification corresponds much better to the prognosis and therapy and 
would represent a late acknowledgement of Schmincke's visionary concept of a
clinically and histomorphologically defined tumor entity. In addition, the
ongoing terminological confusion over the heterogeneous and prognostically weak
spectrum of histological differentiation would subside.

DOI: 10.1007/s00292-013-1846-2 
PMID: 24619524  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
