

2678. Genome Med. 2016 Jan 28;8(1):10. doi: 10.1186/s13073-016-0267-2.

Epigenetic impact of infection on carcinogenesis: mechanisms and applications.

Hattori N(1), Ushijima T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epigenomics, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 5-1-1
Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo, 104-0045, Japan.
(2)Division of Epigenomics, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 5-1-1
Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo, 104-0045, Japan. tushijim@ncc.go.jp.

Viral and bacterial infections are involved in the development of human cancers, 
such as liver, nasopharyngeal, cervical, head and neck, and gastric cancers.
Aberrant DNA methylation is frequently present in these cancers, and some of the 
aberrantly methylated genes are causally involved in cancer development and
progression. Notably, aberrant DNA methylation can be present even in
non-cancerous or precancerous tissues, and its levels correlate with the risk of 
cancer development, producing a so-called 'epigenetic field for cancerization'.
Mechanistically, most viral or bacterial infections induce DNA methylation
indirectly via chronic inflammation, but recent studies have indicated that some 
viruses have direct effects on the epigenetic machinery of host cells. From a
translational viewpoint, a recent multicenter prospective cohort study
demonstrated that assessment of the extent of alterations in DNA methylation in
non-cancerous tissues can be used to predict cancer risk. Furthermore,
suppression of aberrant DNA methylation was shown to be a useful strategy for
cancer prevention in an animal model. Here, we review the involvement of aberrant
DNA methylation in various types of infection-associated cancers, along with
individual induction mechanisms, and we discuss the application of these findings
for cancer prevention, diagnosis, and therapy.

DOI: 10.1186/s13073-016-0267-2 
PMCID: PMC4731931
PMID: 26823082  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
