

2679. Oral Oncol. 2014 Dec;50(12):1137-43. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2014.09.010.
Epub 2014 Oct 14.

Reviewing and reconsidering invasion assays in head and neck cancer.

Inglehart RC(1), Scanlon CS(1), D'Silva NJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics and Oral Medicine, School of Dentistry, University 
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA.
(2)Department of Periodontics and Oral Medicine, School of Dentistry, University 
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA; Department of Pathology, University of Michigan
Medical School, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA. Electronic address:
njdsilva@umich.edu.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) are malignant tumors that arise
from the surface epithelium of the oral cavity, oropharynx and larynx, primarily 
due to exposure to chemical carcinogens or the human papilloma virus. Due to
their location, dental practitioners are well-positioned to detect the lesions.
Deadlier than lymphoma or melanoma, HNSCC is incompletely understood. For these
reasons, dental practitioners and researchers are focused on understanding HNSCC 
and the processes driving it. One of these critical processes is invasion, the
degradation of the basement membrane by HNSCC cells with subsequent movement into
the underlying connective tissue, blood vessels or nerves. Cancer cells
metastasize to distant sites via the blood vessels, lymphatics and nerves.
Metastasis is associated with poor survival. Since invasion is essential for
development and metastasis of HNSCC, it is essential to understand the
mechanism(s) driving this process. Elucidation of the mechanisms involved will
facilitate the development of targeted treatment, thereby accelerating
development of precision/personalized medicine to treat HNSCC. Robust in vitro
and in vivo assays are required to investigate the mechanistic basis of invasion.
This review will focus on in vitro and in vivo assays used to study invasion in
HNSCC, with special emphasis on some of the latest assays to study HNSCC.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2014.09.010 
PMCID: PMC4254578
PMID: 25448226  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
