

2681. Tumour Biol. 2012 Aug;33(4):1201-8. doi: 10.1007/s13277-012-0366-7. Epub 2012 Mar
14.

Poly(I:C) treatment influences the expression of calreticulin and profilin-1 in a
human HNSCC cell line: a proteomic study.

Matijević T(1), Pavelić J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Bijenicka 54, 10000
Zagreb, Croatia.

Polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (poly (I:C)) has been formerly known to be an
interferon inducer but the mechanism of its action was not revealed until the
discovery of Toll-like receptors (TLRs). TLRs are members of transmembrane
proteins that recognize conserved molecular motifs of viral and bacterial origin 
and initiate innate immune response. Recent studies have shown that they are also
expressed on tumor cells, but their role in these cells is still not clear. TLR3 
recognizes double-stranded RNA (poly (I:C)) and is primarily involved in the
defense against viruses. TLR3 ligand binding initiates the activation of
transcription factors NF-κB, IRF family members, and AP-1, which can induce wide 
cascading effect on the cell and consequently activate many cellular processes.
Since little is known about TLR3 target genes, we have used the proteomic
approach to widen the current knowledge. In this study, we have discovered 15
differentially expressed proteins, mostly connected with protein metabolic
processes. Furthermore, we have confirmed by Western blot that calreticulin and
profilin-1, proteins which have been shown previously to be involved in processes
connected with tumor progression, are differentially expressed after poly(I:C)
treatment. By using TLR3 small interfering RNA, we showed that calreticulin
expression might be TLR3 dependent, unlike profilin-1.

DOI: 10.1007/s13277-012-0366-7 
PMID: 22415225  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
