

2682. Sci Rep. 2014 Aug 20;4:6098. doi: 10.1038/srep06098.

Regulation of HPV16 E6 and MCL1 by SF3B1 inhibitor in head and neck cancer cells.

Gao Y(1), Trivedi S(2), Ferris RL(2), Koide K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Pittsburgh, 219 Parkman Avenue,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15260, USA.
(2)University of Pittsburgh Cancer institute, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213,
USA.

ABT-737 inhibits the anti-apoptotic proteins B-cell lymphoma 2 (BCL-2) and
BCL-X(L). Meayamycin B switches the splicing pattern of myeloid cell leukemia
factor 1 (MCL1) pre-mRNA. Specifically, inhibition of splicing factor 3B subunit 
1 (SF3B1) with meayamycin B promotes the generation of the proapoptotic, short
splicing variant (MCL1-S) and diminishes the antiapoptotic, long variant
(MCL1-L). This action was previously associated with the cytotoxicity of
meayamycin B in non-small cell lung carcinoma cell lines. ABT-737 induced
apoptosis in response to an ablation of MCL1-L by meayamycin B. In this study, we
further exploited this synergistic combination in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC), up to 90% of which overexpress MCL1 and BCL-X(L). In a panel
of seven HNSCC cell lines, the combination of meayamycin B and ABT-737 rapidly
triggered a Bax/Bak-mediated apoptosis that overcame the resistance from
HPV16-positive HNSCC against each agent alone. Both RT-PCR and Western blotting
showed that meayamycin B up-regulated MCL1-S and down-regulated MCL1-L.
Significantly, we discovered that SF3B1 was involved in the splicing of oncogenic
HPV16 E6 to produce non-oncogenic HPV16 E6*, indicating that SF3B1 may inhibit
HPV16-induced tumorigenesis.

DOI: 10.1038/srep06098 
PMCID: PMC4138523
PMID: 25139387  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
