

2696. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2015 Feb;27(1):110-5. doi: 10.1097/MOP.0000000000000184.

Importance of viruses in acute otitis media.

Nokso-Koivisto J(1), Marom T, Chonmaitree T.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Otorhinolaryngology, Helsinki University Central Hospital,
Helsinki, Finland bDepartment of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Edith
Wolfson Medical Center, Tel Aviv University Sackler School of Medicine, Holon,
Israel cDivision of Infectious Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Acute otitis media occurs as a complication of viral upper
respiratory tract infection. Bacterial otopathogens and respiratory viruses
interact and play important roles in acute otitis media development. A better
understanding of viral and bacterial interactions may lead to innovative ways to 
lessen the burden of this common childhood disease.
RECENT FINDINGS: There has been increasing evidence that acute otitis media
occurs during upper respiratory infection, even in the absence of nasopharyngeal 
bacterial colonization. Among the types of viruses associated with acute otitis
media, respiratory syncytial virus continues to be the most commonly detected. It
is still unclear whether viral load plays an important role in acute otitis media
development, but symptomatic upper respiratory tract infection (as opposed to
asymptomatic viral infection) is crucial. Widespread use of bacterial and viral
vaccines in young children, including pneumococcal conjugate and influenza
vaccines, has led to the reduction in otitis media-related healthcare use between
2001 and 2011. There has been no new vaccine against respiratory viruses other
than influenza.
SUMMARY: Progress has been made toward the reduction of the burden of acute
otitis media in the last decade. Success in reducing acute otitis media incidence
will rely mainly on prevention of nasopharyngeal otopathogen colonization, as
well as reduction in the incidence of viral upper respiratory tract infection.

DOI: 10.1097/MOP.0000000000000184 
PMCID: PMC4383320
PMID: 25514574  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
