

270. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Jan;43(Database issue):D887-92. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1074.
Epub 2014 Oct 29.

Dr.VIS v2.0: an updated database of human disease-related viral integration sites
in the era of high-throughput deep sequencing.

Yang X(1), Li M(2), Liu Q(3), Zhang Y(4), Qian J(1), Wan X(1), Wang A(1), Zhang
H(1), Zhu C(1), Lu X(1), Mao Y(1), Sang X(1), Zhao H(5), Zhao Y(6), Zhang X(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Liver Surgery, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College (CAMS & PUMC),
Beijing, China.
(2)Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences
(CAS), Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, China University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)School of Life Sciences and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery Department, Cancer Hospital, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College (CAMS & PUMC),
Beijing, China.
(5)Department of Liver Surgery, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College (CAMS & PUMC),
Beijing, China zhaoht@pumch.cn.
(6)Department of Liver Surgery, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College (CAMS & PUMC),
Beijing, China Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy
of Sciences (CAS), Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, China
biozy@ict.ac.cn.
(7)School of Life Sciences and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, China
xyzhang@tongji.edu.cn.

Dr.VIS is a database of human disease-related viral integration sites (VIS). The 
number of VIS has grown rapidly since Dr.VIS was first released in 2011, and
there is growing recognition of the important role that viral integration plays
in the development of malignancies. The updated database version, Dr.VIS v2.0
(http://www.bioinfo.org/drvis or bminfor.tongji.edu.cn/drvis_v2), represents 25
diseases, covers 3340 integration sites of eight oncogenic viruses in human
chromosomes and provides more accurate information about VIS from high-throughput
deep sequencing results obtained mainly after 2012. Data of VISes for three newly
identified oncogenic viruses for 14 related diseases have been added to this 2015
update, which has a 5-fold increase of VISes compared to Dr.VIS v1.0. Dr.VIS v2.0
has 2244 precise integration sites, 867 integration regions and 551 junction
sequences. A total of 2295 integration sites are located near 1730 involved
genes. Of the VISes, 1153 are detected in the exons or introns of genes, with 294
located up to 5 kb and a further 112 located up to 10 kb away. As viral
integration may alter chromosome stability and gene expression levels,
characterizing VISes will contribute toward the discovery of novel oncogenes,
tumor suppressor genes and tumor-associated pathways.

Â© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gku1074 
PMCID: PMC4383912
PMID: 25355513  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
