

2703. Cancer Radiother. 2015 Aug;19(5):337-46; quiz 360-1, 363. doi:
10.1016/j.canrad.2015.02.014. Epub 2015 Jun 25.

[Radioresistance parameters in head and neck cancers and methods to
radiosensitize].

[Article in French]

Biau J(1), Chautard E(2), Miroir J(3), Lapeyre M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Département de radiothérapie, centre Jean-Perrin, 58, rue Montalembert, BP
5026, 63011 Clermont-Ferrand cedex 1, France; EA7283 Cancer Resistance Exploring 
and Targeting (CREAT), Clermont université, université d'Auvergne, 49, boulevard 
François-Mitterrand, CS 60032, 63001 Clermont-Ferrand cedex 1, France; Équipe
recombinaison, réparation et cancer, UMR 3347, CNRS, centre universitaire, 91405 
Orsay cedex, France; Inserm U1021, centre universitaire, 91405 Orsay cedex,
France; Institut Curie, 26, rue d'Ulm, 75005 Paris, France. Electronic address:
julian.biau@cjp.fr.
(2)Département de radiothérapie, centre Jean-Perrin, 58, rue Montalembert, BP
5026, 63011 Clermont-Ferrand cedex 1, France; EA7283 Cancer Resistance Exploring 
and Targeting (CREAT), Clermont université, université d'Auvergne, 49, boulevard 
François-Mitterrand, CS 60032, 63001 Clermont-Ferrand cedex 1, France.
(3)Département de radiothérapie, centre Jean-Perrin, 58, rue Montalembert, BP
5026, 63011 Clermont-Ferrand cedex 1, France.

Head and neck cancers have been widely studied concerning their sensitivity to
radiation therapy. Several parameters affect tumour response to radiation
therapy. Some parameters are linked to the tumour. Large or invasive tumours,
localization, such as oral cavity or adenopathy, are factors of radioresistance. 
Others parameters are linked to the patients themselves. Tobacco intoxication
during radiotherapy and a low hemoglobin level contribute to radioresistance.
More recently, a positive human papilloma virus (HPV) status has been reported to
positively affect radiosensitivity. Finally, other parameters are related to
tumour biology. Hypoxia, intrinsic radiosensitivity of tumour cells, tumour
differentiation and repopulation (provided by Ki-67 index or EGFR level) are
components of radiosensitivity. Currently, concurrent chemoradiotherapy is one of
the gold standard treatments to overcome clinical outcome of locally advanced
head and neck cancer. This combination increases locoregional control and
survival. Taxane-based induction chemotherapy can also be an alternative. Another
validated approach is the association of radiotherapy with cetuximab (EGFR
targeting) but only one randomized study has been published. Fractionation
modifications, especially hyperfractionation, have given positive results on both
tumour control and survival. Strategies targeting hypoxia improve locoregional
control but have less clinical impact.

Copyright © 2015 Société française de radiothérapie oncologique (SFRO). Published
by Elsevier SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canrad.2015.02.014 
PMID: 26119219  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
