

2706. Acta Otolaryngol. 2014 Jun;134(6):636-45. doi: 10.3109/00016489.2014.886336. Epub
2014 Mar 19.

The impact of HPV infection on survival in a geographically defined cohort of
oropharynx squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) patients in whom surgical treatment
has been one main treatment.

Lj√∏kjel B(1), Lybak S, Haave H, Olofsson J, Vintermyr OK, Aarstad HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology/Head & Neck Surgery, Haukeland University
Hospital , Bergen.

CONCLUSIONS: We determined that 55% of the patients with oropharynx squamous cell
carcinoma (OPSCC) had human papilloma virus (HPV)-positive tumors. We
demonstrated that HPV-positive patients had better 5-year disease-specific
survival (DSS) than the HPV-negative counterparts. This was also primarily true
for cancers originating in the tonsil or base of the tongue with T3 and/or N2
tumors.
OBJECTIVE: Urogenital high risk (hr) HPV is an important risk factor, and
probably causative agent, for OPSCC. The study investigated these factors.
METHODS: We identified 232 patients with OPSCC, of which 186 lesions were from
the tonsil or base of the tongue region, treated in the period 1992-2008 in
Western Norway. Five-year DSS was recorded for all patients.
RESULTS: In all, 124 of 226 patients had HPV-positive tumors. All except five
HPV-positive patients had HPV-16-positive tumors; 69% of the patients with tonsil
or base of the tongue SCC had HPV-positive tumors, whereas 14% of remaining OPSCC
patients had HPV-positive tumors. Five-year DSS with HPV-positive tumor was 77%
compared with 53% with an HPV-negative tumor (p < 0.001), also valid with
adjustment for age, gender, and TNM stage, but primarily determined with patients
with the specific tumor sites tonsils and base of the tongue with TNM stages T3
or N2.

DOI: 10.3109/00016489.2014.886336 
PMID: 24828351  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
