

2709. World J Surg Oncol. 2016 Jul 15;14(1):184. doi: 10.1186/s12957-016-0941-2.

Solitary splenic metastasis from nasopharyngeal carcinoma: a case report and
systematic review of the literature.

Genova P(1), Brunetti F(2), Bequignon E(3)(4), Landi F(2), Lizzi V(2), Esposito
F(2), Charpy C(5), Calderaro J(5), Azoulay D(2), de'Angelis N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General and Oncological Surgery, Azienda Ospedaliera
Universitaria Policlinico "Paolo Giaccone", Via del Vespro 129, 90127, Palermo,
PA, Italy. pietro.genova@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Digestive, Hepatobiliary Surgery and Liver Transplantation,
Henri Mondor University Hospital, AP-HP, Université Paris Est - UPEC, Créteil,
France.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, Henri Mondor
University Hospital, AP-HP, Université Paris Est - UPEC, Créteil, France.
(4)INSERM U955, Créteil, France.
(5)Department of Pathology, Henri Mondor University Hospital, AP-HP, Université
Paris Est - UPEC, Créteil, France.

BACKGROUND: Solitary splenic metastases are a rare occurrence, and the
nasopharyngeal carcinoma represents one of the most uncommon primary sources. The
present study aimed to describe a rare case of a solitary single splenic
metastasis from nasopharyngeal carcinoma and to assess the number of cases of
isolated nasopharyngeal carcinoma metastases to the spleen reported in the
literature.
MAIN BODY: We describe the case of a 56-year-old man with a history of
nasopharyngeal carcinoma and complete remission after chemo-radiotherapy. Three
months after complete remission, positron emission tomography/computed tomography
scan revealed a hypermetabolic splenic lesion without increased metabolic
activity in other areas. After laparoscopic splenectomy, the pathology report
confirmed a single splenic metastasis from undifferentiated carcinoma of the
nasopharyngeal type. The postoperative period was uneventful. We also performed a
systematic review of the literature using MEDLINE and Google Scholar databases.
All articles reporting cases of splenic metastases from nasopharyngeal carcinoma,
with or without histologic confirmation, were evaluated. The literature search
yielded 15 relevant articles, which were very heterogeneous in their aims and
methods and described only 25 cases of splenic metastases from nasopharyngeal
carcinoma.
CONCLUSION: The present review shows that solitary splenic metastases from
nasopharyngeal carcinoma are a rare event, but it should be considered in
patients presenting with splenic lesions at imaging and a history of primary or
recurrent nasopharyngeal carcinoma. No evidence supports a negative impact of
splenectomy in patients with solitary splenic metastasis from nasopharyngeal
carcinoma.

DOI: 10.1186/s12957-016-0941-2 
PMCID: PMC4947368
PMID: 27422630  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
