

2713. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2017 Mar 8;46(3):155-159. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0529-5807.2017.03.003.

[Clinicopathologic characteristics of head and neck carcinoma showing thymus-like
element].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Cui XJ(1), Zhang CY, Su P, Lyu B, Ren YB, Fan XS, Zhang XF, Wang Y, Song YH, Liu 
ZY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shandong University Qilu Hospital, Jinan 250012,
China.

Objective: To investigate clinicopathological features of carcinoma showing
thymus-like elements (CASTLE) in the head and neck regions. Methods:
Clinicopathological data of 7 patients with CASTLE in the head and neck regions
were retrospectively reviewed.Immunohistochemical staining and in situ
hybridization for EBER were performed. BRAF(V600E) mutation was examined by ARMS 
method in 6 cases. Results: There were 5 females and 2 males with age between 49 
and 78 years (average of 65.6 years). All tumors were solitary nodular lesions
with an infiltrative border, including 6 intrathyroid tumors and 1 extrathyroid
tumor in the laryngeal pharynx.The tumors were 1.7-4.1 cm in diameter (average of
3.0 cm). Four cases demonstrated lymph node metastasis.All patients were alive
without metastasis during follow-up, except one consultation case (with FNA
sample) developed recurrence at the primary site. The cases showed different
immunoreaction to CD5, diffuse immunoreaction with p63, CK5/6 and CD117, but
negative staining for TTF1, TG and calcitonin. One case showed positive
immunoreaction with Synin less than 30% tumor cells. The Ki-67 labeling index was
between 3% and 90%. No BRAF(V600E) mutation and EB virus infection were detected.
Conclusions: Extrathyroid CASTLE involving laryngeal pharynx shows the similar
morphological and immunohistochemical features with intrathyroid
CASTLE.Immunohistochemical markers of CD5 and CD117 are helpful in the diagnosis.
Ki-67 labeling index can be high in CASTLE, especially in lymphoepithelioma type.
CD5-negative CASTLE may have neuroendocrine differentiation. BRAF(V600E) mutation
and EB virus may not be involved in the carcinogenesis of CASTLE.

Publisher: 目的： 探讨头颈部显示胸腺样分化的癌(carcinoma showing thymus like elements,
CASTLE)的细胞学特点及临床病理特征。 方法：
收集7例CASTLE患者存档资料，行细胞学、组织学观察及免疫组织化学(LASB法)染色，采用突变扩增阻滞系统(ARMS)法检测BRAF(V600E)基因突变，并采
用EBER原位杂交检测EB病毒感染情况，分析其细胞学特点及临床病理特征。 结果：
7例患者，5例女性，2例男性。年龄49～78岁，平均年龄65.6岁。6例位于甲状腺内，1例位于下咽。7例均为孤立性结节，边界相对清楚。肿瘤直径1.7～4.1
cm，平均直径3.0
cm。4例(含下咽病例)伴有颈部淋巴结转移。7例均有随访。1例于甲状腺内原位复发，并行甲状腺细针穿刺。其余6例均未发现复发和转移。1例CASTLE局灶性表达CD5
(小于5%肿瘤细胞)，30%肿瘤细胞表达突触素，其余6例CASTLE弥漫阳性表达CD5。所有病例阳性表达CK5/6、p63、CD117，不表达甲状腺转录因子1、甲
状腺球蛋白、CT。Ki-67阳性指数在3%～90%。6例均无BRAF(V600E)基因突变。6例EBER原位杂交均为阴性。 结论：
位于下咽CASTLE具有和甲状腺内CASTLE相同形态学特点和免疫组织化学表型。CD5和CD117是诊断CASTLE的有效指标。CD5阴性的CASTLE可伴神经内
分泌分化。CASTLE的Ki-67阳性指数可以较高，在淋巴上皮癌型CASTLE中尤为明显。BRAF(V600E)基因突变和EB病毒感染可能不参与CASTLE的发生
。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.issn.0529-5807.2017.03.003 
PMID: 28297754  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
