

272. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Apr 1;15(7):2335-43. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-2690.
Epub 2009 Mar 24.

Telomerase-specific virotheranostics for human head and neck cancer.

Kurihara Y(1), Watanabe Y, Onimatsu H, Kojima T, Shirota T, Hatori M, Liu D, Kyo 
S, Mizuguchi H, Urata Y, Shintani S, Fujiwara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, School of Dentistry, Showa
University, Tokyo, Japan.

PURPOSE: Long-term outcomes of patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the head 
and neck (SCCHN) remain unsatisfactory despite advances in combination of
treatment modalities. SCCHN is characterized by locoregional spread and it is
clinically accessible, making it an attractive target for intratumoral biological
therapies.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: OBP-301 is a type 5 adenovirus that contains the replication
cassette in which the human telomerase reverse transcriptase promoter drives
expression of the E1 genes. OBP-401 contained the replication cassette and the
green fluorescent protein (GFP) gene. The antitumor effects of OBP-301 were
evaluated in vitro by the sodium
30-[1-(phenylaminocarbonyl)-3,4-tetrazolium]-bis(4-methoxy-6-nitro)benzene
sulfonic acid hydrate assay and in vivo in an orthotopic xenograft model. Virus
spread into the lymphatics was also orthotopically assessed by using OBP-401.
RESULTS: Intratumoral injection of OBP-301 resulted in the shrinkage of human
SCCHN tumors orthotopically implanted into the tongues of BALB/c nu/nu mice and
significantly recovered weight loss by enabling oral ingestion. The levels of GFP
expression following ex vivo infection of OBP-401 may be of value as a positive
predictive marker for the outcome of telomerase-specific virotherapy. Moreover,
whole-body fluorescent imaging revealed that intratumorally injected OBP-401
could visualize the metastatic lymph nodes, indicating the ability of the virus
to traffic to the regional lymphatic area and to selectively replicate in
neoplastic lesions, resulting in GFP expression and cell death in metastatic
lymph nodes.
CONCLUSIONS: These results illustrate the potential of telomerase-specific
oncolytic viruses for a novel therapeutic and diagnostic approach, termed
theranostics, for human SCCHN.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-2690 
PMID: 19318473  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
