

2720. Eur J Cancer Prev. 2017 Mar;26(2):144-150. doi: 10.1097/CEJ.0000000000000221.

BART miRNAs: an unimaginable force in the development of nasopharyngeal
carcinoma.

Wang Y(1), Guo Z, Shu Y, Zhou H, Wang H, Zhang W.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Clinical Pharmacology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University and Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Central South University
bDepartment of Radiation Oncology, Hunan Provincial Tumor Hospital & Affiliated
Tumor Hospital of Xiangya Medical School, Central South University cHunan Key
Laboratory of Pharmacogenetics dHunan Key Laboratory of Translational Radiation
Oncology, ChangSha, People's Republic of China eDepartment of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a head and neck cancer that represents a major 
health burden in Southern China and Southeast Asia. Although the close
association of NPC with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection has been demonstrated,
its exact role in the pathogenesis of this malignancy is still unclear. The
expression of EBV-encoded microRNAs, especially BART miRNAs, which are encoded
from the BamHI-A region of the viral genome, is detected at a high level in NPC. 
miRNAs are small noncoding mRNAs that can positively regulate the virus to ensure
accurate expression of viral genomes and to modify the gene expression of host
cells by negative regulation. Accumulating evidence suggests that ebv-mir-BARTs
play a critical role in host cell survival, immune escape, cell proliferation,
cell apoptosis, and cancer metabolism, promoting the generation of NPC. This
review will summarize our current understanding of the nature and function of
ebv-mir-BARTs in NPC.

DOI: 10.1097/CEJ.0000000000000221 
PMCID: PMC5321115
PMID: 26909566  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
