

2723. Cancer Res. 2011 Nov 1;71(21):6878-87. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0295. Epub
2011 Sep 12.

FOXO3a-Dependent Mechanism of E1A-Induced Chemosensitization.

Su JL(1), Cheng X, Yamaguchi H, Chang YW, Hou CF, Lee DF, Ko HW, Hua KT, Wang YN,
Hsiao M, Chen PB, Hsu JM, Bast RC Jr, Hortobagyi GN, Hung MC.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology, College of Medicine, China Medical
University, Taiwan.

Gene therapy trials in human breast, ovarian, and head and neck tumors indicate
that adenovirus E1A can sensitize cancer cells to the cytotoxic effects of
paclitaxel in vitro and in vivo. Resistance to paclitaxel has been reported to
occur in cells expressing low levels of the Forkhead transcription factor FOXO3a.
In this article, we report that FOXO3a is critical for E1A-mediated
chemosensitization to paclitaxel. RNA interference-mediated knockdown of FOXO3a
abolished E1A-induced sensitivity to paclitaxel. Mechanistic investigations
indicated that E1A indirectly stabilized FOXO3a by acting at an intermediate step
to inhibit a ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis pathway involving the E3 ligase
βTrCP and the FOXO3a inhibitory kinase IKKβ. E1A derepressed this inhibitory
pathway by stimulating expression of the protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A)/C protein 
phosphatases, which by binding to the TGF-β-activated kinase TAK1, inhibited its 
ability to activate IKKβ and, thereby, to suppress βTrCP-mediated degradation of 
FOXO3a. Thus, by stimulating PP2A/C expression, E1A triggers a signaling cascade 
that stabilizes FOXO3a and mediates chemosensitization. Our findings provide a
leap forward in understanding paclitaxel chemosensitization by E1A, and offer a
mechanistic rational to apply E1A gene therapy as an adjuvant for improving
therapeutic outcomes in patients receiving paclitaxel treatment.

©2011 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0295 
PMCID: PMC3242367
PMID: 21911455  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
