

2725. Lancet Oncol. 2017 May;18(5):e254-e265. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(17)30179-1. Epub 
2017 Apr 26.

Proton therapy for head and neck cancer: expanding the therapeutic window.

Leeman JE(1), Romesser PB(1), Zhou Y(2), McBride S(1), Riaz N(1), Sherman E(3),
Cohen MA(4), Cahlon O(1), Lee N(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Medical Physics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY,
USA.
(5)Department of Radiation Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, NY, USA. Electronic address: leen2@mskcc.org.

Use of proton beam therapy has expanded, with the number of proton centres
rapidly increasing not only in the USA but also worldwide. The physical
characteristics of the proton beam offer important advantages versus widely used 
photon techniques in terms of radiation precision. In head and neck cancer in
particular, proton beam therapy is uniquely suited for the complex anatomy of
tumours and sensitive surrounding organs. De-intensification and personalisation 
of treatment to limit toxicity are of renewed importance in the context of human 
papilloma virus-associated disease, in which young patients will be cured but
bear the consequences of adverse effects for decades. Comparisons of radiation
dose distributions between photon and proton techniques suggest considerable
benefit in terms of toxicity sparing, but this has only recently been confirmed
by substantial clinical data. In this Review, we attempt to define the role of
this method in the contemporary multidisciplinary management of various types of 
head and neck cancer.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(17)30179-1 
PMID: 28456587  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
