

2728. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2012 Oct;269(10):2271-6. doi:
10.1007/s00405-011-1908-0. Epub 2012 Jan 4.

Pharyngeal squamous cell papilloma in adult Japanese: comparison with laryngeal
papilloma in clinical manifestations and HPV infection.

Hirai R(1), Makiyama K, Higuti Y, Ikeda A, Miura M, Hasegawa H, Kinukawa N, Ikeda
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Nihon University School of
Medicine, 30-1 Oyaguchi-kamicho, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173-8610, Japan.
hirai.ryoji@nihon-u.ac.jp

A number of reports have investigated the relationship between laryngeal
papilloma and human papilloma virus (HPV) infection. On the other hand, it is
unclear whether the HPV infection is involved in the occurrence of pharyngeal
papilloma. We hypothesized that HPV infection was involved in the occurrence of
pharyngeal papilloma similarly to laryngeal papilloma. To verify this hypothesis,
we investigated the presence of HPV infection. Furthermore, clinical
manifestations of pharyngeal papilloma, which had rarely been reported, were
discussed. A male-to-female ratio, solitary or multiple occurrences, and
koilocytosis were examined in cases with pharyngeal papilloma. HPV DNA was
examined with unfixed surgically resected specimens of pharyngeal papilloma. A
screening test by the liquid-phase hybridization method was carried out for the
HPV high-risk group (16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 56, 58, 59, and 68) and HPV 
low-risk group (6, 11, 42, 43, 44). As a control, 15 cases with laryngeal
papilloma for which the same screening test was carried out were employed.
Pharyngeal papilloma occurred as a solitary lesion more often, whereas laryngeal 
papilloma occurred as multiple tumors more frequently. The HPV infection rate was
0% in pharyngeal papilloma cases, which was in stark contrast with 66.7% in the
HPV low-risk group in laryngeal papilloma cases. Pharyngeal papilloma occurred as
a solitary lesion in females more frequently. Contrary to our hypothesis, the
involvement of HPV infection was unlikely in the occurrence of pharyngeal
papilloma.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-011-1908-0 
PMID: 22215212  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
