

2729. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2016 Nov;273(11):3863-3867. Epub 2016 Mar 28.

Prognostic role of the combination of platelet count and neutrophil-lymphocyte
ratio in patients with hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma.

Nakahira M(1), Sugasawa M(2), Matsumura S(2), Kuba K(2), Ohba S(2), Hayashi T(2),
Minami K(2), Ebihara Y(2), Kogashiwa Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Saitama Medical University International 
Medical Center, 1397-1 Yamane, Hidaka, Saitama, 350-1298, Japan.
nakahiratosa59@yahoo.co.jp.
(2)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Saitama Medical University International 
Medical Center, 1397-1 Yamane, Hidaka, Saitama, 350-1298, Japan.

Hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (HPSCC) is an aggressive disease with poor
prognosis; but has no established biomarkers on the order of human papilloma
virus and p16 in oropharyngeal carcinoma. This study investigated pre-treatment
serum markers, including the combination of platelet count and
neutrophil-lymphocyte ratio (COP-NLR) as a prognosis predictor in patients with
HPSCC treated in our hospital. We retrospectively reviewed electronic medical
records of 118 consecutive patients treated with curative intent at our hospital 
between 2007 and 2013. Of these 118 patients, we enrolled 100 patients for whom
we had sufficient data to analyze relationships between clinico-laboratory
characteristics and survival, including the prognostic significance of
pre-treatment serum markers and previous reported clinical factors. Multivariate 
analysis of clinico-laboratory characteristics associated COP-NLR with
cancer-specific survival, as were lymph node metastases. Kaplan-Meier analysis
and log-rank tests showed that the COP-NLR could stratify those patients into
three independent groups (P = 0.003). COP-NLR might be a useful predictor of
survival in patients with HPSCC.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-016-3996-3 
PMID: 27020267  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
