

2730. Anticancer Res. 2014 Sep;34(9):4929-37.

Matrix metalloproteinase-2 and -14 in p16-positive and -negative HNSCC after
exposure To 5-FU and docetaxel In Vitro.

Aderhold C(1), Umbreit C(2), Faber A(2), Birk R(2), Sommer JU(2), Hörmann K(2),
Schultz JD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital
Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany christoph.aderhold@umm.de.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital
Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most
common cancer in the world. While the incidence of HNSCC associated with tobacco 
and alcohol abuse is falling, the incidence of HNSCC associated with human
papilloma virus (HPV) is rising. Proliferation, cell migration and formation of
metastases are dependent on interactions between the tumor cells, tumor stromal
cells and the extracellular matrix (ECM). Degradation of the ECM is a crucial
step in the process of local tumor infiltration and formation of locoregional and
distant metastases. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of enzymes that
are able to degrade the ECM. Locally advanced HNSCC with cervical node metastases
are treated with docetaxel in induction chemotherapy (ICT) combined with
platinum-based chemotherapy and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) as standard clinical
anti-neoplastic regimens. This study evaluated the expression of MMP-14 and MMP-2
in HPV-positive (CERV196) and HPV-negative squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC 11A and
14C) and the alteration of expression levels after exposure to either docetaxel
or 5-FU.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Tumor cells were exposed to 5-FU or docetaxel in
concentrations of 1.0 and 5.0 μmol/ml. MMP-protein expression was evaluated by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) after 2, 3, 5, 8 and 10 days of
incubation.
RESULTS: Docetaxel exposure significantly decreased MMP-14 expression in HNSCC
11A and especially 14C but not in CERV196 apart from an apoptotic process. 5-FU
had no significant effect on MMP-14 expression independent of the HPV-status.
Significant alterations of MMP-2 could be detected in HNSCC 11A only.
CONCLUSION: Although neither of the applied drugs were selective inhibitors of
MMP-expression, surprisingly docetaxel significantly decreased MMP-14 in HNSCC
14C and 11A in this study. Interestingly, HPV-positive CERV196 was not sensitive 
to decreased MMP-14 or -2 expression following incubation with 5-FU or docetaxel.

Copyright© 2014 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.


PMID: 25202075  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
