

2731. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2011 May;135(5):602-9. doi: 10.1043/2010-0655-RAIR.1.

An update on molecular diagnostics of squamous and salivary gland tumors of the
head and neck.

Hunt JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, 55 Fruit St, Boston, 
MA 02114, USA. jhunt5@partners.org

CONTEXT: Molecular testing in anatomic pathology is becoming standardized and can
contribute valuable diagnostic, therapeutic, and prognostic information for the
clinical management of patients. In head and neck pathology, recent advances in
molecular testing have provided important targets in several different diagnostic
areas, with particular emerging clinical applications in squamous and salivary
gland pathology. In squamous mucosal-derived lesions, human papilloma virus has
emerged as an important pathogenic etiology in a subset of oropharyngeal squamous
cell carcinomas. Within the category of salivary gland tumors, 3 tumors have
recently been recognized that contain oncogenic translocations.
OBJECTIVE: To describe the current state of information about the molecular
alterations in squamous lesions and in salivary gland tumors of the head and
neck.
DATA SOURCES: Published literature on squamous and salivary gland tumors of the
head and neck.
CONCLUSIONS: The different approaches to identification of viral-associated
tumors include assays using polymerase chain reaction, in situ hybridization, and
immunohistochemistry. Most mucoepidermoid carcinomas harbor MECT1-MAML2 gene
rearrangement. The MYB-NFIB translocations have recently been identified in
adenoid cystic carcinomas. Finally, a newly described tumor of salivary gland,
mammary analogue secretory carcinoma, harbors the ETV6-NTRK3 translocation.
Although these translocations are just emerging as diagnostic targets, future
roles may evolve as potential therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.1043/2010-0655-RAIR.1 
PMID: 21526958  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
