

2734. Int J Cancer. 2010 Mar 1;126(5):1256-62. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24842.

Is the improved prognosis of p16 positive oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma
dependent of the treatment modality?

Fischer CA(1), Zlobec I, Green E, Probst S, Storck C, Lugli A, Tornillo L,
Wolfensberger M, Terracciano LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital,
Basel, Switzerland. cfischer@uhbs.ch

The incidence of human papilloma virus (HPV) induced oropharyngeal squamous cell 
carcinoma (OPSCC) increases in the western countries. These OPSCC show distinct
molecular characteristics and are characterized by an overexpression of p16,
considered a surrogate marker for HPV infection. When compared to patients with
p16 negative OPSCC, patients with HPV induced p16 positive OPSCC show a
significantly better prognosis, which is reported to be caused by increased
radiosensitivity. The objective of the present study was to analyze the impact of
p16 expression status on the prognosis of OPSCC treated by either radiotherapy
(RT) or primary surgery. Results are based upon a tissue microarray (TMA) of 365 
head neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) including 85 OPSCC with
clinico-pathological and follow-up data. p16 positivity correlated significantly 
with oropharyngeal tumor localization (p < 0.001). Patients with p16 positive
OPSCC exhibited a significantly better overall survival than those with p16
negative tumors (p = 0.007). In a multivariate analysis, survival benefit of
patients with p16 positive OPSCC was independent of clinico-pathological
parameters such as cT and cN classification and treatment modality. The improved 
prognosis of p16 positive OPSCC is found after RT as well as after surgery.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.24842 
PMID: 19697324  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
