

2736. Oral Dis. 2016 Jan;22(1):9-18. doi: 10.1111/odi.12300. Epub 2015 Jan 19.

Oxidative stress in oral diseases.

Kesarwala AH(1), Krishna MC(2), Mitchell JB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Radiation Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Radiation Biology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Oxidative species, including reactive oxygen species (ROS), are components of
normal cellular metabolism and are required for intracellular processes as varied
as proliferation, signal transduction, and apoptosis. In the situation of chronic
oxidative stress, however, ROS contribute to various pathophysiologies and are
involved in multiple stages of carcinogenesis. In head and neck cancers
specifically, many common risk factors contribute to carcinogenesis via ROS-based
mechanisms, including tobacco, areca quid, alcohol, and viruses. Given their
widespread influence on the process of carcinogenesis, ROS and their related
pathways are attractive targets for intervention. The effects of radiation
therapy, a central component of treatment for nearly all head and neck cancers,
can also be altered via interfering with oxidative pathways. These pathways are
also relevant to the development of many benign oral diseases. In this review, we
outline how ROS contribute to pathophysiology with a focus toward head and neck
cancers and benign oral diseases, describing potential targets and pathways for
intervention that exploit the role of oxidative species in these pathologic
processes.

Published 2014. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public
domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1111/odi.12300 
PMCID: PMC4442080
PMID: 25417961  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
