

2738. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2015 Dec;49(3):278-87. doi: 10.1007/s12016-014-8431-1.

The Differential Diagnosis of Dry Eyes, Dry Mouth, and Parotidomegaly: A
Comprehensive Review.

Cornec D(1)(2)(3), Saraux A(1)(2)(3), Jousse-Joulin S(1)(2)(3), Pers JO(2)(3)(4),
Boisramé-Gastrin S(4), Renaudineau Y(2)(3)(4)(5), Gauvin Y(6), Roguedas-Contios
AM(7), Genestet S(8), Chastaing M(9), Cochener B(10), Devauchelle-Pensec
V(11)(12)(13)(14).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Brest Teaching Hospital, Brest, France.
(2)EA2216, INSERM ESPRI, ERI29, Université de Brest, Brest, France.
(3)LabEx IGO, Brest, France.
(4)Department of Odontology, Brest Teaching Hospital, Brest, France.
(5)Laboratory of Immunology, Brest Teaching Hospital, Brest, France.
(6)Department of Ear, Nose, Throat, Brest Teaching Hospital, Brest, France.
(7)Department of Dermatology, Brest Teaching Hospital, Brest, France.
(8)Department of Neurological Functional Explorations, Brest Teaching Hospital,
Brest, France.
(9)Department of Psychiatry, Brest Teaching Hospital, Brest, France.
(10)Department of Ophthalmology, Brest Teaching Hospital, Brest, France.
(11)Department of Rheumatology, Brest Teaching Hospital, Brest, France.
valerie.devauchelle-pensec@chu-brest.fr.
(12)EA2216, INSERM ESPRI, ERI29, Université de Brest, Brest, France.
valerie.devauchelle-pensec@chu-brest.fr.
(13)LabEx IGO, Brest, France. valerie.devauchelle-pensec@chu-brest.fr.
(14)Service de Rhumatologie, Hôpital de la Cavale Blanche, BP 824, 29609, Brest
Cedex, France. valerie.devauchelle-pensec@chu-brest.fr.

Primary Sjögren's syndrome (pSS) is a frequent autoimmune systemic disease,
clinically characterized by eyes and mouth dryness in all patients, salivary
gland swelling or extraglandular systemic manifestations in half of the patients,
and development of lymphoma in 5 to 10 % of the patients. However, patients
presenting with sicca symptoms or salivary gland swelling may have a variety of
conditions that may require very different investigations, treatments, or
follow-up. Eye and/or mouth dryness is a frequent complaint in clinical setting, 
and its frequency increases with age. When evaluating a patient with suspected
pSS, the first step is to rule out its differential diagnoses, before looking for
positive arguments for the disease. Knowledge of normal and abnormal lachrymal
and salivary gland physiology allows the clinician to prescribe the most adapted 
procedures for evaluating their function and structure. New tests have been
developed in recent years for evaluating these patients, notably new ocular
surface staining scores or salivary gland ultrasonography. We describe the
different diagnoses performed in our monocentric cohort of 240 patients with
suspected pSS. The most frequent diagnoses are pSS, other systemic autoimmune
diseases, idiopathic sicca syndrome and drug-induced sicca syndrome. However,
other diseases are important to rule out due to their specific management, such
as sarcoidosis, granulomatosis with polyangeitis, IgG4-related disease, chronic
hepatitis C virus or human immunodeficiency virus infections, graft-versus-host
disease, and head and neck radiation therapy. At the light of these data, we
propose a core of minimal investigations to be performed when evaluating a
patient with suspected pSS.

DOI: 10.1007/s12016-014-8431-1 
PMID: 24952023  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
