

274. Oral Oncol. 2015 Apr;51(4):305-13. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2014.10.005. Epub 
2014 Oct 30.

The role of surgery for HPV-associated head and neck cancer.

Mydlarz WK(1), Chan JY(1), Richmon JD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States. Electronic address:
jrichmo7@jhmi.edu.

The incidence of human papillomavirus (HPV)-associated oropharyngeal cancer
continues to increase in contrast to other head and neck cancer sites. There is a
growing role for upfront surgery to treat these cancers in the era of organ
preservation treatment strategies. This is becoming especially important in
younger, healthier patients with HPV-associated squamous cell carcinoma. Surgery 
for oropharyngeal cancer has evolved from large, open transcervical and
transmandibular approaches to minimally-invasive transoral endoscopic techniques.
Advances in transoral endoscopic surgery (TES) have led to renewed interest in
upfront surgical treatment for oropharyngeal carcinoma. Transoral laser
microsurgery (TLM) and transoral robotic surgery (TORS) are two techniques that
allow for complete oncologic resection through the mouth in select patients, with
minimal cosmetic deformity and optimal speech and swallow function after
completion of therapy. In this article we will review transoral approaches to
oropharyngeal carcinoma: its oncologic and functional outcomes, and its role in
the multi-disciplinary treatment of oropharyngeal cancer.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2014.10.005 
PMID: 25456011  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
