

2740. Invest New Drugs. 2011 Jun;29(3):401-10. doi: 10.1007/s10637-009-9356-z. Epub
2009 Dec 16.

Hypoxia-targeting by tirapazamine (TPZ) induces preferential growth inhibition of
nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells with Chk1/2 activation.

Hong B(1), Lui VW, Hui EP, Ng MH, Cheng SH, Sung FL, Tsang CM, Tsao SW, Chan AT.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Signaling Laboratory, Department of Clinical Oncology, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, New Territories, Hong Kong.

Hypoxia is commonly developed in solid tumors, which contributes to metastasis as
well as radio- and chemo-resistance. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a highly
invasive and metastatic head and neck cancer prevalent in Southeast Asia with a
high incidence rate of 15-30/100,000 persons/year (comparable to that of
pancreatic cancer in the US). Previous clinical studies in NPC showed that
hypoxia is detected in almost 100% of primary tumors and overexpression of
hypoxia markers correlated with poor clinical outcome. Tirapazamine (TPZ) is a
synthetic hypoxia-activated prodrug, which preferentially forms cytotoxic and
DNA-damaging free radicals under hypoxia, thus selectively eradicate hypoxic
cells. Here, we hypothesized that specific hypoxia-targeting by this clinical
trial agent may be therapeutic for NPC. Our findings demonstrated that under
hypoxia, TPZ was able to induce preferential growth inhibition of NPC cells,
which was associated with marked cell cycle arrest at S-phase and PARP cleavage
(a hallmark of apoptosis). Examination of S-phase checkpoint regulators revealed 
that Chk1 and Chk2 were selectively activated by TPZ in NPC cells under hypoxia. 
Hypoxia-selectivity of TPZ was also demonstrated by preferential downregulation
of several important hypoxia-induced markers (HIF-1Î±, CA IX and VEGF) under
hypoxia. Furthermore, we demonstrated that TPZ was equally effective and
hypoxia-selective even in the presence of the EBV oncoprotein, LMP1 or the EBV
genome. In summary, encouraging results from this proof-of-concept study
implicate the therapeutic potential of hypoxia-targeting approaches for the
treatment of NPC.

DOI: 10.1007/s10637-009-9356-z 
PMID: 20013349  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
