

2741. Head Neck Pathol. 2012 Jul;6 Suppl 1:S55-62. doi: 10.1007/s12105-012-0363-6. Epub
2012 Jul 3.

HPV-related squamous cell carcinoma variants in the head and neck.

El-Mofty SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, 660 S Euclid Ave, Campus Box 8118, St Louis, MO, USA. elmofty@wustl.edu

The great majority of HPV-related carcinoma of the oropharynx is nonkeratinizing 
squamous cell carcinoma. More recently, an increasing number of squamous cell
carcinoma variants that are HPV positive are being reported in the oropharynx, as
well as in other head and neck sites. As a result, several clinical and
pathologic questions have emerged. Importantly, questions raised include whether 
the virus is biologically active and involved in the pathogenesis of these
tumors, and whether there are clinical implications with regard to patient
outcome and treatment modality changes that may be needed in HPV-related
variants. Examples of HPV-related squamous cell carcinoma variants that will be
addressed here include: basaloid squamous cell carcinoma, undifferentiated
carcinoma, adenosquamous carcinoma, papillary squamous carcinoma, and small cell 
carcinoma. Some investigations have suggested a favorable prognosis in some
variants, analogous to that of the conventional nonkeratinizing (basaloid)
carcinoma, while others showed poorer outcome. So far, the number of studies on
this subject is limited and the number of cases evaluated in each investigation
is few. Because of this, it is prudent at this stage not to alter management
protocols as a result of identification of HPV in these variants and to await
additional studies.

DOI: 10.1007/s12105-012-0363-6 
PMCID: PMC3394165
PMID: 22782224  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
