

2743. Oncology. 2014;86(4):199-205. doi: 10.1159/000358598. Epub 2014 Apr 30.

The role of BMI1 as a biomarker of cancer stem cells in head and neck cancer: a
review.

Allegra E(1), Trapasso S, Pisani D, Puzzo L.

Author information: 
(1)Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Department of Medical and Surgical
Sciences, University Magna Graecia of Catanzaro, Campus Universitario, Località
Germaneto, Catanzaro, Italy.

Emerging studies show that BMI1 (B cell-specific Moloney murine leukemia virus
integration site 1) has an important function as a biomarker of cancer stem cells
(CSCs), i.e. cells with self-renewal characteristics, capable of tumor
initiation, progression, invasion, metastasis, tumor recurrence and resistance to
chemotherapy and radiotherapy. The failure of current anticancer therapies can be
attributed to the relative ineffectiveness of drug and radiation treatments on
CSCs, thereby preserving the full capacity of the cells to reproduce tumors. The 
development of new strategies is currently hindered by the lack of reliable
markers for the identification of these CSCs. At present, they have been isolated
from solid tumors at various locations using a variety of surface markers,
including CD34, CD133, CD24, CD44, CD29 and CD31, in addition to the methods of
isolation and cell culture via the Wnt, BMI1, Notch and Hedgehog pathways. The
discovery of specific tumor targets for CSCs would constitute a big step in the
research for the definitive therapy against cancer. More studies are being
conducted that consider the role of CSCs in head and neck cancers with potential 
for an impact on clinical-surgical outcomes from the knowledge that is being
gained. A promising intracellular marker of CSCs in head and neck cancer is the
oncoprotein BMI1, with specific data about its prognostic value based on the
specific location.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000358598 
PMID: 24800958  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
