

2746. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health. 2015 Nov;46(6):1055-62.

NOCARDIOSIS REVEALED BY THYROID ABSCESS AND PNEUMONIA IN A LIVER TRANSPLANT
RECIPIENT.

Reechaipichitkul W, Thanasatirakul P.

Nocardia thyroid abscess with pneumonia is a rare clinical presentation. We
reported a liver transplant recipient with Nocardia thyroiditis and pneumonia
after receiving high dose immunosuppressants to preserve his graft. The patient
is a 50-year-old male who developed hepatitis C virus-related liver cirrhosis and
received a liver transplant. Seven months post-transplantation the patient
developed graft rejection, which was treated with 3 days pulse dose
methyl-prednisolone followed by an increased dose of his tracolimus,
mycophenolate and prednisolone. He presented to the hospital with a 2 week
history of fever, tenderness in his anterior neck and dry cough. On admission his
temperature was 39.5Â°C. The right wing of his thyroid gland was swollen to 3 cm
in size, fluctuant and tender. On auscultation of his lungs there were fine
crepitations and increased vocal resonance in the right middle lung field. On
laboratory testing, a complete blood count (CBC) revealed leukocytosis
(19,900/mm3) with neutrophils (97%). A chest X-ray showed an patchy infiltrates
and round circumscribed densities in the superior segment of the right lower lobe
of his lung. A CT scan of his neck revealed a diffusely enlarged right wing of
the thyroid gland, 3.8 cm in diameter that had an abnormal hyposignal area. A CT 
of his chest revealed consolidation of the superior segment of the right lower
lobe and necrotic right paratracheal lymph nodes with inflamed strap muscles.
Fine needle aspiration of the right lobe of thyroid gland was performed. Modified
acid-fast bacilli (MAFB) staining showed partially acid-fast beaded branching
filamentous organisms and a culture grew out Nocardia asteroides. He was treated 
with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole for 6 months. He improved clinically and his
chest X-ray also cleared.


PMID: 26867364  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
