

2754. Am J Rhinol Allergy. 2013 Mar-Apr;27(2):91-7. doi: 10.2500/ajra.2013.27.3851.

Some polymorphisms in Epstein-Barr virus-induced gene 3 modify the risk for
chronic rhinosinusitis.

Zhang Y(1), Wang C, Zhao Y, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Beijing Tongren Hospital,
Capital Medical University, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Forkhead box protein 3 (FOXP3), a transcription factor required for
development and function of regulatory T cell, and Epstein-Barr virus-induced
gene 3 (EBI3), a downstream target of FOXP3, may be important in the development 
of chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) with or without sinonasal polyposis (CRSwNP and
CRSsNP, respectively). Our objective was therefore to examine the presence of any
associations between specific single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in/around
the FOXP3 and EBI3 genes and risk for CRS in Chinese subjects. A population-based
case-control association analysis was performed.
METHODS: DNA extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes from 667 subjects with
CRS (360 CRSwNP and 306 CRSsNP) and 330 healthy controls was assessed for SNPs
selected and complemented with tagging SNPs. A total of seven SNPs (4 in FOXP3
and 3 in EBI3 genes) were genotyped and genetic association tests were performed.
RESULTS: In the single-locus analyses of CRS risk, the allele frequencies of
rs428253 (p = 0.0191) in EBI3 gene and rs2232365 (p = 0.0307) and rs3761548 (p = 
0.0221) in FOXP3 gene were significantly different between the CRS cases and the 
controls. Furthermore, genotype association analysis showed a significant
protective effect only between EBI3_rs428253 (CG/CC; p = 0.029) and CRS after
adjustment. Similarly, stratified analysis of CRS risk on category showed
rs428253 of the EBI3 gene to play a protective role among both CRSwNP (CG/CC; p =
0.002) and CRSsNP (GG/CC; p = 0.023) subjects. Haplotype analysis of the FOXP3
gene region further indicated that CRS risk was higher in individuals carrying
the haplotype GG in rs2294018-rs2232365 block, compared with wild-type AG
haplotype, and AG in rs3761548-4824747 block, compared with wild-type CG
haplotype.
CONCLUSION: The findings of this study suggest that SNPs in FOXP3 and EBI3 genes 
modify the risk for development of CRS.

DOI: 10.2500/ajra.2013.27.3851 
PMID: 23562195  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
