

2758. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2010 May;267(5):821-30. doi:
10.1007/s00405-009-1086-5. Epub 2009 Sep 2.

Human beta-Defensins in different states of diseases of the tonsilla palatina.

Schwaab M(1), Gurr A, Hansen S, Minovi AM, Thomas JP, Sudhoff H, Dazert S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of ENT, Head and Neck Surgery, Ruhr-University Bochum,
Elisabeth-Hospital, Bleichstr. 15, 44787 Bochum, Germany. matthiasschwaab@gmx.de

Tonsils are believed to play an important role during the development of the
immune system. Although diseases of the tonsils like hypertrophy of the tonsil,
acute tonsillitis, chronic tonsillitis or peritonsillar abscess are common,
little is known about the underlying pathophysiology. Little is known about
antimicrobial peptides produced by the tonsils. The human beta-Defensins 1-3
(hBD1-3) are naturally produced "antibiotics" with antimicrobial activity against
different bacteria, fungi, and viruses. The objective of the study was to
determine the concentrations for hBD1-3 in different states of diseases of the
tonsilla palatina. After tonsillectomy and tissue fixation in formalin, total
proteins were isolated from 38 samples (11 hypertrophy of the tonsil, 8 acute
tonsillitis, 11 chronic tonsillitis, 8 peritonsillar abscesses). The protein
concentration was determined and ELISA for hBD1-3 were performed. We also
conducted immunofluorescence double stainings for the co-expression of
streptococcus group A and hBD1-3. We could verify a significant difference for
the mean hBD1 score of the acute tonsillitis in comparison to the hyperplastic
tonsil, the chronic tonsillitis, and the peritonsillar abscess. There was no
statistically significant difference in the hBD2 and hBD3 concentrations between 
the four groups. The immunofluorescence stainings showed that hBD1-3 and the
streptococcus group A in the same place. We conclude that in the hyperplastic
tonsilla palatina hBD1-3 play an important role. The mouth is constantly faced
with a high bacterial load. During a tonsillitis, the hBD1 concentration is lower
than in the non-acute infected tonsil because hBD1 is being consumed for fighting
the bacterial infection. But, the existence of hBD1-3 in the tonsil cannot
prevent the tonsillitis to become chronic.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-009-1086-5 
PMID: 19727784  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
