

2761. Oral Oncol. 2014 Dec;50(12):1182-7. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2014.09.009. Epub
2014 Oct 14.

Patient-reported outcomes following parotid-sparing intensity-modulated
radiotherapy for head and neck cancer. How important is dysphagia?

Roe JW(1), Drinnan MJ(2), Carding PN(3), Harrington KJ(4), Nutting CM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Head and Neck Unit, The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, Fulham Road,
London SW3 6JJ, United Kingdom; The Institute of Cancer Research, 123 Old
Brompton Road, London SW7 3RP, United Kingdom. Electronic address:
Justin.roe@nhs.net.
(2)Institute of Cellular Medicine, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 7RU,
United Kingdom. Electronic address: m.j.drinnan@ncl.ac.uk.
(3)School of Allied and Public Health, Australian Catholic University, Brisbane
Campus, 1100 Nudgee Road, Banyo, Queensland, 4014, Australia. Electronic address:
paul.carding@acu.edu.au.
(4)Head and Neck Unit, The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, Fulham Road,
London SW3 6JJ, United Kingdom; The Institute of Cancer Research, 123 Old
Brompton Road, London SW7 3RP, United Kingdom. Electronic address:
kevin.harrington@icr.ac.uk.
(5)Head and Neck Unit, The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, Fulham Road,
London SW3 6JJ, United Kingdom; The Institute of Cancer Research, 123 Old
Brompton Road, London SW7 3RP, United Kingdom. Electronic address:
chris.nutting@rmh.nhs.uk.

OBJECTIVES: Swallowing can be significantly affected during and following
radiotherapy for head and neck cancer (HNC). The purpose of this study was to
understand: (1) the trajectory of swallowing recovery following parotid-sparing
intensity-modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) and (2) overall physical and
social-emotional wellbeing and how patients prioritise swallowing following
treatment.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Sixty-one HNC patients completed questionnaires as part of
a prospective study exploring patient-reported swallowing outcomes following
parotid-sparing IMRT. Participants were asked to complete the M.D. Anderson
Dysphagia Inventory (MDADI) and University of Washington Quality of Life
Questionnaire (UW-QoL) v.04 before treatment and 3, 6 and 12months after
treatment. Given the rise in human papilloma virus (HPV) and associated
oropharyngeal cancers, we completed a sub analysis of the data in those
participants.
RESULTS: There was a significant reduction in the MDADI composite scores 3months 
after completion of treatment. Improvements were observed by 12months, however,
scores did not recover to baseline. The recovery in physical function was limited
in comparison to social-emotional recovery at 12months. When oropharyngeal cancer
scores were analysed, there was not a substantial difference to the whole group
results. There was a shift in priorities following treatment. Swallowing was
highlighted as a concern by 44% of HNC patients up to 12months after treatment
with swallowing-related factors (saliva, taste and chewing) rated highly.
CONCLUSIONS: Patient reported swallowing outcomes were significantly affected
from baseline to all follow-up time points and remained a priority concern at
12months following treatment. Overall social-emotional functioning does improve, 
suggesting that patients have the potential to adapt to their "new normal"
following IMRT for HNC.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2014.09.009 
PMID: 25448227  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
