

2765. Int J Oncol. 2017 Nov;51(5):1471-1481. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2017.4142. Epub 2017 Oct 
2.

Adoptive immunotherapy combined with FP treatment for head and neck cancer: An
in vitro study.

Nishio-Nagai M(1), Suzuki S(2), Yoshikawa K(3), Ueda R(2), Kazaoka Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Aichi Medical University,
Nagakute, Aichi 480-1195, Japan.
(2)Department of Tumor Immunology, Aichi Medical University School of Medicine,
Nagakute, Aichi 480-1195, Japan.
(3)Division of Advanced Research Promotion, Institute of Comprehensive Medical
Research, Aichi Medical University School of Medicine, Nagakute, Aichi 480-1195, 
Japan.

FP treatment, which combines 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and cisplatin (CDDP)
chemotherapy, is widely used for treatment of advanced head and neck cancer
(HNC). It has been suggested that these drugs cause immunomodulation in the
cancer microenvironment, for example, downregulation of immunosuppressive cells
such as regulatory T-cells (Tregs) and myeloid-derived suppressive cells (MDSCs),
activating dendritic cells (DCs), and upregulation of tumor antigens and major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules in cancer cells leads to enhancement
of cancer immunity, which is important in cancer treatment, as well as providing 
a direct killing effect. Therefore, development of chemoimmunotherapy by
combining FP treatment with immunotherapy for HNC has become a recent challenging
issue. However, the direct effects of these drugs on immune effector cells,
especially cytotoxic T-lymphocytes (CTLs), are not well known. We have
investigated the direct actions of these drugs on CTL functions in in vitro
experiments using cytomegalovirus (CMV) pp65 antigen-specific CTLs (CMVpp65-CTLs)
and oral squamous cell cancer (OSCC) cell lines overexpressing CMVpp65 antigen as
target cells. Although CDDP partially inhibited proliferation of memory
CMVpp65-CTL in peripheral blood, the proliferation was not inhibited by 5-FU.
Cytotoxicity and the IFN-γ release response of the CMVpp65-CTLs were not
inhibited by these drugs, and it is important to note that these drugs,
especially 5-FU, sensitized OSCC cell lines to CMVpp65-CTL. Furthermore,
CMVpp65-CTL cytotoxicity to CDDP-resistant OSCC cells, HSC-3/CDDP-R1, was the
same as the cytotoxicity to the parental cells. Thus, we suggest that combined
immunotherapy with FP treatment is an effective novel HNC treatment.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2017.4142 
PMCID: PMC5643067
PMID: 29048671  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
