

2768. Lin Chung Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2017 Nov 20;31(22):1711-1715.
doi: 10.13201/j.issn.1001-1781.2017.22.003.

[Coblation and silicon stent implantation for recurrent laryngeal papilloma with 
extensive lesions].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen DH(1), Zheng HL(1), Zhang CY(1), Li M(1), Liu F(1), Zhu MH(1), Chen SC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Changhai Hospital,
Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, 200433, China.

Objective:To evaluate the feasibility and long-term outcome of radiofrequency
coblation combined with silicon stent implantation in the treatment of recurrent 
laryngeal papilloma with extensive lesions. Method:From March 2009 to April 2016,
a total of 13 patients (8 males, 5 females; aged 28-67 years) who suffered
recurrent laryngeal papilloma were enrolled in this retrospective study. All the 
cases had undergone at least one operation at other hospitals before this
hospitalization. The recurrence interval (RI) of these cases ranged from 2 to 6
months. Video-laryngoscopy or stroboscopy were preformed preoperatively and
postoperatively, as well as vocal function assessment. These cases underwent
radiofrequency coblationin combination of different stent implantation (member, 7
cases; tube, 4 cases; T-shaped tube, 2 cases) under general anesthesia. The
follow-up was 12 to 76 months. Result:Laryngoscopy revealed that the lesions
mainly located in the vocal folds, anterior commissure, ventricular band,
posterior commissure, epiglottis and even in subglottic area. Varying extent of
mucosal adhesion of anterior or/and posterior commissure were observed in all
cases, and two cases suffered mild subglottic tracheal stenosis. Two to six weeks
after surgery, the silicon stent were removed and no mucosal adhesion were found 
except for 2 cases who suffered mucosal adhesion of anterior commissure again.
Compared to preoperative scores, VHI-10 and G scores showed the significant
improvement of voice quality postoperatively in all cases. The recurrence of
papilloma was observed in 3 cases during 1-year follow-up, and 4 cases during
2-year follow-up, no recurrence in 6 cases. These recurrence lesions mainly
located in ventricular band, subglottic area and trachea. However, no recurrence 
occurred in these cases who received ablation again. No serious complications
were observed in these cases. Conclusion:Radiofrequency ablation may be an
effective approach in the treatment of recurrent laryngeal papilloma with
extensive lesions. One-stage application of suitable silicon stents can
effectively prevent the adhesion of the wound and the onset oflaryngo-tracheal
stenosis, and improve the quality of voice.

CopyrightÂ© by the Editorial Department of Journal of Clinical Otorhinolaryngology
Head and Neck Surgery.

DOI: 10.13201/j.issn.1001-1781.2017.22.003 
PMID: 29798181  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
