

2779. J Laryngol Otol. 2010 Dec;124(12):1257-62. doi: 10.1017/S0022215110001568. Epub
2010 Jul 6.

Lemierre's and Lemierre's-like syndromes in association with infectious
mononucleosis.

Chacko EM(1), Krilov LR, Patten W, Lee PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Medical Center, Winthrop University Hospital, Mineola, New York
11501, USA.

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to review cases of Lemierre's and Lemierre's-like
syndromes in paediatric patients, to examine a possible association with
Epstein-Barr virus as a predisposing factor, and to assess the impact of this
virus on the severity of illness.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective analysis of data from the in-patient
database at Winthrop University Hospital, from January 2001 to October 2007. We
reviewed clinical and laboratory findings as well as the outcome of infection in 
patients aged 21 years or less with a diagnosis of Lemierre's syndrome. An
additional case of Lemierre's-like syndrome was also included. The illness
severity and duration of in-patient management of those testing positive for
heterophile antibody were then compared with the same parameters in patients who 
tested negative.
RESULTS: Of the five patients diagnosed with Lemierre's syndrome, two had
concomitant acute infection with Epstein-Barr virus. Additionally, a 19-year-old 
adolescent was admitted during this period with acute infectious mononucleosis,
Fusobacterium necrophorum sepsis, sinusitis, frontal lobe abscess and ophthalmic 
vein thrombosis. The clinical presentation of all patients included fever, sore
throat, and ear or neck pain. The duration of symptoms ranged from two days to
three weeks prior to admission. The patients with acute Epstein-Barr virus
infection had been diagnosed with infectious mononucleosis prior to admission,
and tested positive for heterophile antibody. These patients subsequently
underwent more extensive in-patient treatment, including intensive care
management and ventilator support. The patients who tested negative for
heterophile antibody experienced a milder course of illness, with a shorter
duration of in-patient management.
CONCLUSION: Two patients diagnosed with Lemierre's syndrome, and a third with
Fusobacterium necrophorum sepsis, had coexisting acute Epstein-Barr virus
infection. Patients who tested positive for heterophile antibody experienced a
more severe course of illness. These observations suggest a possible association 
between Epstein-Barr virus infection and the severity of concomitant Lemierre's
syndrome.

DOI: 10.1017/S0022215110001568 
PMID: 20602850  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
