

2780. Cancer Sci. 2014 Jan;105(1):72-80. doi: 10.1111/cas.12315. Epub 2013 Dec 1.

Novel anti-tumor mechanism of galanin receptor type 2 in head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma cells.

Uehara T(1), Kanazawa T, Mizukami H, Uchibori R, Tsukahara T, Urabe M, Kume A,
Misawa K, Carey TE, Suzuki M, Ichimura K, Ozawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Graduate School of
Medicine, University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara, Japan; Division of Genetic
Therapeutics, Center for Molecular Medicine, Jichi Medical University,
Shimotsuke, Japan; Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Jichi
Medical University School of Medicine, Shimotsuke, Japan.

Galanin and its receptors, GALR1 and GALR2, are known tumor suppressors and
potential therapeutic targets in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC).
Previously, we demonstrated that, in GALR1-expressing HNSCC cells, the addition
of galanin suppressed tumor proliferation via upregulation of ERK1/2 and
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors, whereas, in GALR2-expressing cells, the
addition of galanin not only suppressed proliferation, but also induced
apoptosis. In this study, we first transduced HEp-2 and KB cell lines using a
recombinant adeno-associated virus (rAAV)-green fluorescent protein (GFP) vector 
and confirmed a high GFP expression rate (>90%) in both cell lines at the
standard vector dose. Next, we demonstrated that GALR2 expression in the presence
of galanin suppressed cell viability to 40-60% after 72 h in both cell lines.
Additionally, the annexin V-positive rate and sub-G0/G1 phase population were
significantly elevated in HEp-2 cells (mock vs GALR2: 12.3 vs 25.0% (P < 0.01)
and 9.1 vs 32.0% (P < 0.05), respectively) after 48 h. These changes were also
observed in KB cells, although to a lesser extent. Furthermore, in HEp-2 cells,
GALR2-mediated apoptosis was caspase-independent, involving downregulation of
ERK1/2, followed by induction of the pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 protein, Bim. These
results illustrate that transient GALR2 expression in the presence of galanin
induces apoptosis via diverse pathways and serves as a platform for suicide gene 
therapy against HNSCC.

Â© 2013 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.12315 
PMCID: PMC4317884
PMID: 24168112  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
