

2784. Oncol Rep. 2011 Dec;26(6):1573-9. doi: 10.3892/or.2011.1423. Epub 2011 Aug 17.

Latent membrane protein 1 mediates the resistance of nasopharyngeal carcinoma
cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis by activation of the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway.

Li SS(1), Yang S, Wang S, Yang XM, Tang QL, Wang SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, The Second Xiangya
Hospital, Central South University, Changsha 410011, Hunan, PR China.

The 5-year survival rate of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is still disappointing
despite the much improved technologies in its treatment. Tumor necrosis
factor-related apoptosis inducing ligand (TRAIL) can selectively induce apoptosis
in most tumor cells while sparing normal cells. However, its potential in the
treatment of NPC has been limited by the eventual emergence of drug resistance.
Latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) is a major oncogene of the human DNA tumor virus
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and is associated with the development of NPC and the
emergence of chemo-resistance in NPC. In this study, we investigated the
potential role of LMP1 in TRAIL resistance in CNE-1 NPC cells. Results show that 
overexpression of LMP1 could induce TRAIL resistance in NPC cells without
influencing death receptors. The LMP1-induced TRAIL resistance is associated with
increased expression of FLIP and elevated cleavage of caspase-8 without altering 
the TRAIL-mediated mitochondrial events and Bid cleavage. Knockdown of the FLIP
gene with siRNA prevented the LMP1-induced TRAIL resistance. Furthermore, we
found that overexpression of LMP1 activated Akt. Inhibition of Akt with LY294002 
completely prevented the LMP1-induced FLIP expression and TRAIL resistance.
Together, these results show that LMP1 can inhibit the TRAIL-mediated apoptosis
through activation of PI3K/Akt and expression of FLIP in CNE-1 NPC cells, and may
provide new methods to prevent and reverse drug resistance in NPC.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2011.1423 
PMID: 21850380  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
