

2790. Oncol Rep. 2010 Apr;23(4):1027-36.

BUBR1 expression in benign oral lesions and squamous cell carcinomas: correlation
with human papillomavirus.

Lira RC(1), Miranda FA, Guimarães MC, Simões RT, Donadi EA, Soares CP, Soares EG.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Patologia, Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto,
Universidade de São Paulo-USP, CEP 14049-900, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil.

Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is the most common head and neck cancer. Only
in Brazil, the estimate is for 14,160 new cases in 2009. HPV is associated with
increasing risk of oral cancer, but its role in carcinogenesis is still
controversial. BUBR1, an important protein in the mitotic spindle assembly
checkpoint (SAC), has been associated with some virus-encoded proteins and
cancer. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the expression of BUBR1 in
non-malignant oral lesions and OSCC with and without metastasis associated with
HPV infection. We performed immunohistochemistry for BUBR1 in 70 OSCC biopsies
divided into three groups (in situ tumors, invasive tumors without metastasis and
invasive tumors with metastasis) with their respective lymph nodes from samples
with metastasis and in 16 non-malignant oral lesions. PCR was performed in order 
to detect HPV DNA. Significantly higher BUBR1 expression associated with shorter 
survival (p=0.0479) was observed in malignant lesions. There was also a
significant correlation (r=1.000) with BUBR1 expression in lesions with
metastasis and their lymph nodes. Ninety percent of OSCC and 100% of benign
lesions were HPV positive. HPV16 and HVP18 were present in 13 and 24% of
HPV-positive OSCC samples, respectively. HPV was more prevalent (76%) in samples 
with a high BUBR1 expression and the absence of viral DNA had no influence on
BUBR1 expression. These findings suggest that HPV could be associated with
overexpression of BUBR1 in OSCC, but not in benign oral lesions.


PMID: 20204288  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
