

2793. East Afr Med J. 2010 Dec;87(12):481-7.

The prevalence, clinical features, risk factors and outcome associated with
cryptococcal meningitis in HIV positive patients in Kenya.

Mdodo R(1), Brown K, Omonge E, Jaoko W, Baddley J, Pappas P, Kempf MC, Aban I,
Odera S, Suleh A, Jolly PE.

Author information: 
(1)University of Alabama, School of Public Health, 1665 University Boulevard,
RPHB 217, Birmingham AL 35294-0022, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To determine the prevalence, clinical features, risk factors and
outcomes associated with cryptococcal meningitis (CM) in human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) positive patients at two referral hospitals in Nairobi, Kenya.
DESIGN: Prospective, observational study.
SETTING: Kenyatta National Hospital (KNH) and Mbagathi District Hospital (MDH),
Nairobi, Kenya.
SUBJECTS: Three hundred and forty HIV patients presenting with suspected CM.
RESULTS: Of three hundred and forty suspected CM patients, 111 (33%) were
diagnosed with CM by CrAg. Among CM patients, in-hospital mortality was 36%
(38/106), median age was 35 years (range, 19-60 years) and median CD4 count was
41 cells/microL (n = 89, range 2-720 cells/microL). Common clinical
manifestations among CM patients included headache 103 (93%), neck stiffness 76
(69%) and weight loss 53 (48%). Factors independently associated with CM were
male sex, headache, blurred vision and previous antifungal drug use. Night sweats
and current use of anti-retroviral therapy were associated with reduced risk for 
CM.
CONCLUSIONS: There is a high prevalence of CM and CM-associated mortality in HIV 
patients at KNH and MDH despite treatment with antifungal and anti-retroviral
drugs. This study demonstrates the need to address the existing inadequacies of
CM patient outcomes in Kenya.


PMCID: PMC3602928
PMID: 23457857  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
