

2797. Semin Neurol. 2010 Apr;30(2):131-44. doi: 10.1055/s-0030-1249221. Epub 2010 Mar
29.

When and how to investigate the patient with headache.

De Luca GC(1), Bartleson JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester,
Minnesota, USA.

The common complaint of headache usually has a benign cause, most often a primary
headache syndrome. The history and neurologic and general physical examinations
usually permit a definitive diagnosis. When in doubt, diagnostic testing is
indicated. Certain historical and examination findings increase the likelihood of
a secondary headache disorder and the need for diagnostic testing. These include 
(1) recent head or neck injury; (2) a new, worse, worsening, or abrupt onset
headache; (3) headache brought on by Valsalva maneuver or cough; (4) headache
brought on by exertion; (5) headache associated with sexual activity; (6)
pregnancy; (7) headache in the patient over the age of ~50; (8) neurologic
findings and/or symptoms; (9) systemic signs and/or symptoms; (10) secondary risk
factors, such as cancer or human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. Less
worrisome are headaches that wake the patient from sleep at night, always occur
on the same side, or show a prominent effect of change in posture on the
patient's pain. Diagnostic studies include neuroimaging, cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) examination, and blood tests, which are selected depending on the patient's
history and findings. For most patients, the diagnostic test of choice is a
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain scan. Computed tomography (CT) of the
brain is usually obtained in the setting of trauma or the abrupt onset of
headache. CSF examination is useful in diagnosing subarachnoid bleeding,
infection, and high and low CSF pressure syndromes.

Thieme Medical Publishers.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0030-1249221 
PMID: 20352583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
