

2800. Am J Dermatopathol. 2016 Jun;38(6):461-5. doi: 10.1097/DAD.0000000000000505.

Primary Cutaneous Anaplastic Large-Cell Lymphoma With 6p25.3 Rearrangement in a
Cardiac Transplant Recipient: A Case Report and Review of the Literature.

Olson LC(1), Cheng E, Mathew S, Torres-Quinones M, Magro C.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, NewYork Presbyterian
Hospital-Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York, NY; and â€ Dermatocor, Bostwick
Laboratories, Uniondale, NY.

Posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorders define an important form of
lymphoproliferative disease causally linked with a state of iatrogenic immune
dysregulation inherent to the posttransplant setting. Most posttransplant
lymphoproliferative disorders are in the context of Epstein-Barr virus-associated
B-cell lymphoproliferative disease, most notably diffuse large-cell B-cell
lymphoma. A less common variant falls under the rubric of posttransplant T-cell
lymphoproliferative disease, which is largely unrelated to Epstein-Barr virus
infection. Anaplastic large-cell lymphoma (ALCL) is the most recognized form of
posttransplant T-cell lymphoproliferative disease. Although the 6p25.3
translocation is seen in a variety of B-cell lymphoproliferative disorders, this 
particular translocation in the spectrum of T-cell lymphoproliferative disease is
a fairly specific finding pointing toward a diagnosis of primary cutaneous ALCL
and a rare subset of lymphomatoid papulosis. This translocation in the peripheral
T-cell lymphoma setting serves as a favorable prognostic predictor. We report a
case of an 81-year-old heart transplant recipient who developed an expansile neck
mass 17 years after his heart transplant. A diagnosis of cutaneous ALCL was
subsequently made with cytogenetic analysis yielding the 6p25.3 translocation.
The characteristic biphasic morphology of a small-cell epidermotropic neoplastic 
cell populace in concert with a dermal based large-cell infiltrate characteristic
for those cases of ALCL harboring this translocation was seen. After excision of 
the nodule, his azathioprine was withheld. He is currently alive and well without
evidence of disease.

DOI: 10.1097/DAD.0000000000000505 
PMID: 26863058  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
