

2801. Pathol Res Pract. 2018 Jan;214(1):130-133. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2017.10.006. Epub
2017 Oct 16.

Association between epstein barr virus and tongue squamous cell carcinoma in
iranian patients.

Shahrabi-Farahani M(1), Karimi E(2), Mostaan LV(3), Saba S(1), Yazdani N(4), M
Amoli M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic Disorders Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism
Molecular-Cellular Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran.
(2)Otorhinolaryngology Research Center, Amir-Alam Hospital, Department of
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran.
(3)Cancer Research Center, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.
(4)Otorhinolaryngology Research Center, Amir-Alam Hospital, Department of
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: N_Yazdani@tums.ac.ir.
(5)Metabolic Disorders Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism
Molecular-Cellular Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: amolimm@tums.ac.ir.

Detection of Epstein-Barr virus in oral squamous cell carcinoma suggests its
involvement in the carcinogenesis of oral cavity. But, there are few studies on
the incidence of EBV genome in squamous cell carcinomas at specific locations in 
the oral cavity like tongue and with different tumor progression. In this study
the presence of EBV genome in tongue Squamous Cell Carcinoma (TSCC) in Iranian
patients were investigated. Accordingly, a total of 94 cases with TSCC were
firstly analyzed for the presence of viral genome through Nested PCR. Patients
were divided into different groups based on their gender and the size, nodal
involvement, grade and stage of their tumor. Results showed the presence of EBV
genome in 72.3% of TSCCs with no significant difference between two genders,
although slightly higher in females. Interestingly, PCR products of EBV genome
showed a statistically significant higher distribution in TSCCs at IVa stage
(p=0.04), while a considerable low involvement of EBV genome was seen in T1-sized
tumors. The result of this study further emphasizes the role of EBV in oral SCCs 
- mainly at tongue. This is the first investigation to clarify the association
between EBV genome and different tumor size and stage in TSCCs; however, more
studies in different regions and larger populations should be performed to be
able to draw a firmed conclusion.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prp.2017.10.006 
PMID: 29103768  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
