

2806. Microbiol Spectr. 2016 Nov;4(6). doi: 10.1128/microbiolspec.TNMI7-0009-2016.

Upper Respiratory Tract Tuberculosis.

Jindal SK(1), Jindal A(2), Agarwal R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education 
& Research, Sector 12, Chandigarh 160012, India.
(2)Jindal Clinics, Chandigarh 160020, India.

Upper respiratory tract involvement in cases of tuberculosis (TB) of the head and
neck continues to be described in the most recent reports from several different 
regions, including some from developed countries. Laryngeal TB is the most common
of all forms of upper respiratory tract TB (URT-TB). Pulmonary lesions in URT-TB 
are present in about 20% of adults and about 50 to 60% of children. Systemic
manifestations are uncommon. URT-TB is especially seen in patients with a variety
of risk factors, such as the presence of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
infection, diabetes, smoking, alcoholism, drug abuse, malignancies, and use of
immunosuppressive drugs. Nodules or ulcerative lesions are seen on morphological 
examination. Endoscopic examination is required for mucosal lesions. Diagnosis of
TB is suspected on an epidemiological basis in high-prevalence countries or from 
the failure of a patient to respond to routine treatment. Smear and/or
histopathological examinations help in establishing the final etiological
diagnosis. Treatment includes standard anti-TB chemotherapy for at least 6 months
with four primary drugs during the initial intensive phase of 2 months and two or
three primary drugs during the remaining maintenance phase of 4 months. Treatment
is modified on the basis of culture and sensitivity reports in cases of suspected
drug resistance. Surgical intervention may be required for some patients with
abscess formation and progressive disease unresponsive to medical therapy. Airway
obstruction, although rare, even in fulminant cases may require tracheostomy for 
relief.

DOI: 10.1128/microbiolspec.TNMI7-0009-2016 
PMID: 27837744  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
