

2813. Osteoporos Int. 2018 Mar;29(3):595-613. doi: 10.1007/s00198-017-4305-8. Epub 2017
Nov 20.

Reduced bone mineral density in human immunodeficiency virus-infected
individuals: a meta-analysis of its prevalence and risk factors.

Goh SSL(1), Lai PSM(2), Tan ATB(3), Ponnampalavanar S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Primary Care Medicine, University of Malaya Primary Care
Research Group, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Primary Care Medicine, University of Malaya Primary Care
Research Group, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. plai@ummc.edu.my.
(3)Department of Medicine (Endocrine), University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia.
(4)Department of Medicine (Infectious Disease), University of Malaya, Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia.

A meta-analysis was conducted to evaluate the prevalence of
osteopenia/osteoporosis in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected
individuals. The prevalence of osteopenia/osteoporosis in HIV-infected and
antiretroviral therapy (ART)-treated individuals was significantly higher than
respective controls. Evidence regarding bone loss within first year of HIV
infection or ART initiation was preliminary.PURPOSE: The aim of the study is to
systematically review published literature on the prevalence of
osteopenia/osteoporosis and its associated risk factors in HIV-infected
individuals.
METHODS: A literature search was conducted from 1989 to 2015 in six databases.
Full text, English articles on HIV-infected individuals ≥ 18 years, which used
dual X-ray absorptiometry to measure BMD, were included. Studies were excluded if
the prevalence of osteopenia/osteoporosis was without a comparison group, and the
BMD/T-score were not reported.
RESULTS: Twenty-one cross sectional and eight longitudinal studies were included.
The prevalence of osteopenia/osteoporosis was significantly higher in both
HIV-infected [odds ratio (OR) = 2.4 (95%Cl: 2.0, 2.8) at lumbar spine, 2.6
(95%Cl: 2.2, 3.0) at hip] and ART-treated individuals [OR = 2.8 (95%Cl: 2.0, 3.8)
at lumbar spine, 3.4 (95%Cl: 2.5, 4.7) at hip] when compared to controls.
PI-treated individuals had an OR of 1.3 (95%Cl: 1.0, 1.7) of developing
osteopenia/osteoporosis compared to controls. A higher proportion of
tenofovir-treated individuals (52.6%) had lower BMD compared to controls (42.7%),
but did not reach statistical significance (p = 0.248). No significant difference
was found in the percent change of BMD at the lumbar spine, femoral neck, or
total hip from baseline to follow-up between HIV-infected, PI-treated,
tenofovir-treated, and controls. Older age, history of bone fracture, low BMI,
low body weight, being Hispanic or Caucasian, low testosterone level, smoking,
low CD4 cell count, lipodystrophy, low fat mass, and low lean body mass were
associated with low BMD.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of osteopenia/osteoporosis in HIV-infected and
antiretroviral therapy (ART)-treated individuals was two times more compared to
controls. However, evidence concerning bone loss within the first year of HIV
infection and ART initiation was preliminary.

DOI: 10.1007/s00198-017-4305-8 
PMID: 29159533  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
