

2814. J Viral Hepat. 2018 Aug;25(8):894-903. doi: 10.1111/jvh.12892. Epub 2018 Apr 2.

Hepatitis B virus and risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma: An updated meta-analysis of
58 studies.

Li M(1), Gan Y(1), Fan C(2), Yuan H(1), Zhang X(3), Shen Y(4), Wang Q(1), Meng
Z(1), Xu D(1), Tu H(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer
Institute, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Etiology, Qidong People's Hospital/Qidong Liver Cancer
Institute, Qidong, China.
(3)Shanghai Medical Insurance Affairs Management Center, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Previous studies have focused on the relationship between hepatitis B virus (HBV)
infection and non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). However, the results remain
inconsistent and somehow conflicting in different subgroups. The aim of this
study was to combine the findings of independent studies to comprehensively
assess the association between HBV and NHL using a meta-analysis. Relevant
studies were identified through structured keyword searches in PubMed, EMBASE and
the China National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI) database, and 58 studies with 
a total of 53 714 NHL cases and 1 778 591 controls were finally included. Pooled 
estimates indicated a significantly increased NHL risk in HBV-infected
individuals (summary odds ratio [sOR]: 2.50; 95% confidence interval [CI]:
2.20-2.83) regardless of the study design (case-control studies: sOR: 2.47; 95%
CI: 2.16-2.82; cohort studies: sOR: 2.64; 95% CI: 1.78-3.91). Considerable
heterogeneity was observed across studies that was primarily attributed to the
NHL subtypes (meta-regression: P < .05). Overall, B-cell NHL (sOR: 2.46; 95% CI: 
1.97-3.07) presented a stronger association with HBV infection than T-cell NHL
(sOR: 1.67; 95% CI: 1.34-2.10). Within the B-cell NHL subtypes, HBV infection was
significantly associated with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL, sOR: 2.06;
95% CI: 1.48-2.88) and follicular lymphoma (FL, sOR: 1.54; 95% CI: 1.11-2.12),
but not with chronic lymphocytic leukaemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma (CLL/SLL)
and Burkitt lymphoma. The results of this meta-analysis support a positive link
between HBV infection and NHL development. Further investigations for the
mechanisms underlying HBV-induced NHL are warranted.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jvh.12892 
PMID: 29532605  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
