

2815. Exp Mol Pathol. 2014 Dec;97(3):572-8. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2014.10.011. Epub 2014
Oct 29.

Next-generation sequencing of salivary high-grade neuroendocrine carcinomas
identifies alterations in RB1 and the mTOR pathway.

Goyal B(1), Duncavage EJ(2), Martinez D(1), Lewis JS Jr(3), Chernock RD(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Division of Anatomic and Molecular
Pathology, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, United
States.
(2)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Division of Anatomic and Molecular
Pathology, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, United
States; Genomics and Pathology Services, Washington University School of
Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, United States.
(3)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Division of Anatomic and Molecular
Pathology, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, United
States; Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, United States.
(4)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Division of Anatomic and Molecular
Pathology, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, United
States; Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, United States. Electronic address:
rchernock@path.wustl.edu.

Salivary gland high-grade neuroendocrine carcinomas are rare, aggressive tumors
that are morphologically and immunohistochemically similar to cutaneous
high-grade neuroendocrine (Merkel cell) carcinomas. The majority of Merkel cell
carcinomas harbor Merkel cell polyomavirus, while the virus is rare or absent in 
salivary high-grade neuroendocrine carcinomas. Inactivation of retinoblastoma 1
(RB1) has been implicated in the pathogenesis of both virus-positive and
-negative Merkel cell carcinomas but by different mechanisms. In virus-positive
tumors, a portion of the viral genome, the large T antigen, may inactivate RB1,
and in virus-negative Merkel cell carcinomas truncating mutations in the RB1 gene
have been identified. The molecular genetics of salivary high-grade
neuroendocrine carcinomas are not well understood. Here, we performed targeted
next-generation sequencing of 151 cancer-related genes on 4 four Merkel cell
polyomavirus-negative primary salivary gland high-grade neuroendocrine carcinoma 
cases. Somatic mutations were predominantly found within tumor suppressor genes
[TP53 (3 cases), PTEN (2 cases), RB1 (1 case)]. Truncating RB1 mutations, as seen
in virus-negative Merkel cell carcinomas, were not identified. However, 3 of 4
cases had RB1 deletions by copy number variation analysis. The 4th case had loss 
of heterozygosity for RB1. Fluorescence in situ hybridization confirmed RB1
deletions in 2 of 3 cases, and the absence of RB1 deletion in the 4th case that
had loss of heterozygosity. All 4 cases showed loss of RB1 protein expression by 
immunohistochemistry, indicating that RB1 inactivation is important. However, the
mechanism of RB1 inactivation appears different than that seen in Merkel cell
carcinomas. In addition, copy number variation consistent with activation of the 
PI3KCA/AKT/mTOR pathway was also observed in all 4 cases. The mTOR pathway may be
a potential therapeutic target in these tumors as mTOR inhibitors are currently
used to treat other tumor types.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2014.10.011 
PMID: 25446844  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
