

2816. Allergy Asthma Proc. 2012 May-Jun;33 Suppl 1:67-69. doi:
10.2500/aap.2012.33.3553.

Chapter 20: Atopic dermatitis.

Sabin BR, Peters N, Peters AT.

Atopic dermatitis (AD), also known as atopic eczema, is a chronic relapsing
inflammatory dermatosis characterized by pruritus, xerosis, and a close
association with IgE-mediated sensitization to aeroallergens and foods. More than
60% of children with AD are at risk to develop allergic rhinitis or asthma (the
atopic march). The distribution of lesions varies by age. Infants tend to have
lesions on the cheeks and scalp, and very young children typically have
involvement over the extremities cheeks, forehead, and neck. Rash in the diaper
area of infants is rarely AD. Lesions in older children and adults are usually
located in flexural areas, such as the antecubital and popliteal fossae, along
with the head and neck. Acute lesions of AD begin as erythematous papules and
serous exudates. Secondary lesions include excoriations and crusted erosions due 
to scratching. Subacute lesions appear as erythematous scaling papules and
plaques. If the itch and rash progress uncontrolled, chronic lichenified AD
develops featuring accentuated skin markings with hyperpigmentation. Trigger
avoidance, skin hydration, and topical steroids are the first steps for
improvement. In acute lesions of AD, the Th2 cells produce IL-4, IL-13, and
IL-31, which may potentiate barrier dysfunction and contribute to pruritus. In
chronic lesions, the Th1 cells predominate and secrete interferon gamma and
IL-12. Barrier dysfunction from filaggrin predisposes patients to AD. Skin
superinfection, particularly with Staphylococcus aureus, is common, and cultures 
of affected lesions help guide therapy. Eczema herpeticum from herpes simplex
virus can be life-threatening in AD patients.

DOI: 10.2500/aap.2012.33.3553 
PMID: 22794693  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
