

282. Acta Otolaryngol. 2018 Jan;138(1):56-59. doi: 10.1080/00016489.2017.1371330. Epub
2017 Sep 6.

Factors associated with early diagnosis in pediatric vs adult nasopharyngeal
carcinoma.

Li C(1), Wang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Otolaryngology , The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University , Zhengzhou , PR China.

OBJECTIVE: To improve understanding of the initial symptom between pediatric and 
adult nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) and to improve the early diagnosis of NPC.
METHODS: This retrospective cohort study included all 353 patients with a primary
diagnosis of NPC in the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University from
January 2010 to December 2016. Of these, 34 patients were 21 years or younger
(pediatric); 319 patients, older than 21 years (adult). Data were analyzed after 
data collection.
RESULTS: We found no difference between pediatric and adult patients in terms of 
their sex distribution (p > .05).Type III, undifferentiated carcinoma is the most
common subtype in Pediatric patients, while adult patients had more squamous cell
tumors (p < .01). Pediatric patients were more likely to present with stage IV
disease (p <  .05). Of the 353 patients, 120 (34.0%) had only one presenting
symptom initially; however, most patients presented two or more episodes. Neck
mass was the most common presenting symptom initially in children and
adolescents, while multiple ear symptoms in adult patients (p = .003). The median
time from onset of the presenting symptom to diagnosis is three months, adult
patient presented longer history (64.7% vs 44.55, p < .05). Of the 319 adult
patients, there were 142 which the time from onset of the presenting symptom to
diagnosis is less than 3 months and there were 177 more than 3 months, the
difference was significant between the two groups (p < .05). There were no
differences in the misdiagnosis rate between pediatric and adult (35.1 vs 31.0,
p > .05). Among pediatric patients, 31 (91.2%) had positive EBV DNA in peripheral
plasma. EBV DNA was significantly associated with stage (p < .05).
CONCLUSIONS: Although uncommon, pediatric NPC appears to affect a different
patient demographic relative to adult NPC. NPC in children is associated with
undifferentiated carcinoma and more advanced disease presentation.

DOI: 10.1080/00016489.2017.1371330 
PMID: 28875765  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
