

2821. J Clin Densitom. 2010 Oct-Dec;13(4):456-61. doi: 10.1016/j.jocd.2010.06.001. Epub
2010 Jul 21.

Prevalence of bone mineral density abnormalities and related risk factors in an
ambulatory HIV clinic population.

Guillemi S(1), Harris M, Bondy GP, Ng F, Zhang W, Lima VD, Michaels CE, Belzberg 
A, Montaner JS.

Author information: 
(1)British Columbia Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada. sguillemi@cfenet.ubc.ca

Bone mineral density (BMD) abnormalities are observed frequently among human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected patients. Risk factors for reduced BMD in
the setting of HIV have been previously studied, but detailed antiretroviral
treatment history is often not available. A cross-sectional observational study
was conducted between 2005 and 2007 among unselected HIV-infected adults
attending an ambulatory urban HIV clinic. Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) 
scans of lumbar spine and femoral neck, full laboratory profile, detailed
questionnaire, and antiretroviral history were obtained. Univariate and
multivariate logistic regression analyses were performed to investigate factors
associated with BMD below the expected range for age. Two hundred ninety patients
completed the study: 80% Caucasians, 89% males, with median age of 49 yr. Low BMD
as assessed by Z-score was present in 19.7% of the patients. By multivariate
analysis, only lower body mass index (BMI) was an independent risk factor for low
BMD. Cumulative exposure to protease inhibitors, non-nucleosides, and individual 
nucleoside and nucleotide analogs were not independently associated with low BMD.
In conclusion, a 19.7% prevalence of abnormal BMD by DXA scan was identified in
an unselected group of HIV-infected adults. Lower BMI was independently
associated with low BMD. No correlation was found between abnormal BMD and
cumulative exposure to any antiretroviral agents.

Copyright Â© 2010 The International Society for Clinical Densitometry. Published
by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jocd.2010.06.001 
PMID: 20663695  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
