

283. Hum Pathol. 2016 Aug;54:193-200. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2016.04.002. Epub 2016
Apr 19.

The utility of p16 immunostaining in fine needle aspiration in p16-positive head 
and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Xu B(1), Ghossein R(1), Lane J(1), Lin O(1), Katabi N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York
Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York
Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA. Electronic address: katabin@mskcc.org.

Many patients with human papillomavirus (HPV)-related head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma present initially with cervical nodal metastasis. Fine needle
aspiration (FNA) of the nodal disease might be the only diagnostic material
available for p16 immunohistochemistry (IHC) and HPV testing. The current study
aims to evaluate p16 IHC in FNA and establish guidelines for its interpretation. 
The percentage and intensity of p16 IHC staining were examined in 60 matched FNA 
and surgical cases. Cytomorphologic features were included in the analysis. p16
IHC staining was correlated with the results seen in the surgical specimens and
with HPV in situ hybridization (ISH). Analysis of different thresholds
demonstrated that the threshold of 10% p16 tumor cell positivity had the best
overall concordance rate with surgical p16 IHC (κ = 0.650) and with FNA HPV-ISH
(κ = 0.714). Applying the recommended p16 positivity threshold for surgical
specimens (70%) on FNA materials resulted in low sensitivity (39%) and low
negative predictive value (26%). In comparison with p16 IHC in surgical
specimens, 6/46 FNA cases (13%) were falsely negative for p16. All 6 cases were
associated with necrotic background, two (33%) lacked large tumor clusters, and
one (17%) had low cellularity. The recommended threshold for p16 IHC on surgical 
specimens should not be used in cytology materials. The cutoff value for p16
immunostain in FNA specimens showing best results in our series is 10%. When p16 
IHC is negative in FNA specimens, a repeat stain on a surgical specimen is
recommended to avoid a false-negative diagnosis.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2016.04.002 
PMID: 27105759  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
