

2833. Ear Nose Throat J. 2014 Mar;93(3):112-5.

Early detection of nasopharyngeal carcinoma using IgA anti-EBNA1 + VCA-p18
serology assay.

Romdhoni AC(1), Wiqoyah N, Kentjono WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Faculty of Medicine
Airlangga University, Mayjend. Prof. Dr. Moestopo 6-8 St., Surabaya, Indonesia
60286. romdhoni_ent@yahoo.com.

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is the most common head and neck malignancy in
Indonesia. Overall, it ranks fourth in males and sixth in females as the most
prevalent type of cancer in that country. The data show that in the year 2011,
NPC incidence was considered to be intermediate (6.2/100,000 population per
year). Through histopathologic examination, about 70 to 80% of these cases were
found to be type III according to the WHO classificaton. NPC carries an excellent
prognosis if treated early, but most patients presented with stage III to IV
disease, which negatively affected the cure rate and increased the mortality
rate. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) IgA serology has been established as an effective 
marker for NPC. Therefore, biologic markers, DNA, and/or antibody-based diagnosis
is needed to decrease NPC cases. A screening program needs to be developed that
will identify people at high risk of NPC and those who are in the early stage of 
the disease. In this study, 20 samples were collected from post-therapy patients.
An otolaryngologic examination, histopathology of nasopharyngeal tissue, and
blood testing for serologic markers were performed. IgA anti-EBNA1 + VCA-p18
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay showed positive impact as a tool for confirming
the diagnosis of NPC, but it still has to be combined with other specific
diagnostic tools for post-therapy monitoring and for determining prognosis.


PMID: 24652560  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
