

2835. Nihon Jibiinkoka Gakkai Kaiho. 2012 Nov;115(11):957-64.

[The clinical significance of thymidylate synthase expression in human
papillomavirus-related oropharyngeal squamous carcinoma].

[Article in Japanese]

Kato H(1), Yui T, Yamamoto N, Okada T, Urano M, Sakurai K, Naito K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, School of Medicine, Fujita Health University,
Toyoake.

The focus of human papilloma virus (HPV), particulary HPV 16 is on the role of
carcinogenic and prognostic factors on oropharyngeal squamous carcinoma (OSCC).
However, it remains unclear why patients with HPV-positive tumors have better
outcomes than those with HPV-negative tumors. Thymidylate synthase (TS) is one of
the initial key enzymes in the 5-fluouracil (5-FU) metabolic pathway. Clinical
studies showed that intratumoural TS level was related to the response to
5-FU-based chemotherapy in patients with several types of cancer such as
gastroenterological and head and neck cancers. We investigated the prevalence of 
HPV infection and TS expression in the patients with OSCC and evaluated the
prognostic implications according to the HPV status and TS expression. We
evaluated for high-risk HPV types (HPV 16, 18, 31, 33, 51, 52, 58) using a
real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay on archival biopsies from 54
patients with OSCC. Immunohistochemical assessments for TS were also performed.
HPV was positive in 22 (40.7%) of 54 samples. Of these positive cases, 21 (95%)
carried HPV 16 and only 1 (5%) HPV58 sequences. TS was overexpressed in 25
(46.3%) of 54 samples. Of these, 19 (76.0%) had an HPV-negative status and 21
(84.0%) were heavy smokers. TS over-expression was associated with the patients
with HPV-negative tumors (P = 0.02) and heavy smokers (p = 0.012). Univariate
analysis revealed that HPV positive status (77.3% vs. 29.0%; p = 0.006)
significantly improved overall survival. Conversely, no remarkable prognostic
difference was observed on immunohistochemical analysis of TS expression. A
multivariate analysis using Cox's proportional hazard model showed that early T
stage (T1-2), early N stage (N0-1), and positive HPV status were significantly
independent predictors for superior overall survival. Our studies suggested that 
positive HPV status was most strongly associated with a favorable prognosis in
the patients with OSCC. TS expression has an unusual aspect as a biomarker for
OSCC, though it was not related to prognosis.


PMID: 23265074  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
