

2836. Oncol Rep. 2018 Mar;39(3):1306-1312. doi: 10.3892/or.2017.6160. Epub 2017 Dec 15.

Effects of epidermal growth factor receptor fusion protein on the cytotoxic
activity of SOCS1-silenced dendritic cells in vitro.

Jiang Q(1), Wang X(2), Qian M(3), Chen D(1), Xu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Liaoning Medical University, Jinzhou, Liaoning 121000, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Liaoning Medical
University, Jinzhou, Liaoning 121000, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Health Sciences Center, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences
Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

The aim of the present study was to observe the effects of cytokine signaling
suppressor 1 (SOCS1)-silenced dendritic cells (DCs) pulsed with epidermal growth 
factor receptor (EGFR) fusion protein on the activation of T lymphocyte and
cytotoxic T-lymphocyte (CTL) activity against Hep-2 cells. DCs were derived from 
the medullary cells of mice and authenticated by flow cytometry (FCM).
Recombinant glutathione-S-transferase (GST)-EGFR fusion protein was produced and 
purified. After being pulsed with it, DCs were modified by recombinant
SOCS1-siRNA adenoviral to silence SOCS1 gene expression. The maturation of DCs
was evaluated by FCM. The effects of modified DCs on T-cell proliferation were
assessed by MTT assay. The killing effects against Hep-2 cells of CTL were
assessed by lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release assay. High-purity DCs from the
medullary cells of mice were obtained. Compared with the control, EGFR-pulsed DCs
displayed higher expression of cell surface molecules, including CD83, CD860 and 
HLA-DR. The MTT assay revealed that all of the EGFR-pulsed, SOCS1‑silenced and
EGFR-pulsed plus SOCS1-silenced DCs had an enhanced capacity to stimulate
T-lymphocyte proliferation. As expected, EGFR-pulsed plus SOCS1-silenced DCs had 
the strongest effects on T-cell proliferation. The splenic T cells isolated from 
both EGFR-pulsed DC-immunized mice and EGFR-pulsed plus SOCS1-silenced
DC-immunized mice enhanced the cytotoxicity against Hep-2 cells, while T cells
from EGFR‑pulsed plus SOCS1-silenced DC-immunized mice exhibited significantly
higher cytotoxicity than those from EGFR-DC-immunized mice. The EGFR-pulsed
SOCS1‑siRNA-silenced DCs had the strongest effects on activation of T-cell
proliferation and the CTL activity against Hep-2 cells.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2017.6160 
PMID: 29286121  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
