

284. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol). 2010 Sep;22(7):538-46. doi:
10.1016/j.clon.2010.05.024. Epub 2010 Jun 26.

The changing aetiology of head and neck cancer: the role of human papillomavirus.

Evans M(1), Powell NG.

Author information: 
(1)Velindre Cancer Centre, Cardiff, UK. Mererid.Evans@velindre-tr.wales.nhs.uk

Human papillomavirus (HPV) is associated with the development of a subset of head
and neck cancers arising in the oropharynx, which includes the tonsils, base of
tongue and soft palate. HPV-associated oropharyngeal cancer (OPC) seems to be
rapidly increasing in incidence in many countries, including the USA, Sweden and 
Greece, and is known to affect younger patients who are less likely to have been 
exposed to the carcinogenic effects of tobacco and alcohol than their
HPV-negative counterparts. There is accumulating evidence from prospective
studies that HPV-positive OPC responds better to treatment, including
chemotherapy and radiotherapy, than HPV-negative OPC, and that patients with
HPV-positive disease have excellent long-term survival rates. To date, patients
with HPV-positive and HPV-negative OPC are managed according to common treatment 
protocols; this may no longer be appropriate in an age when the delivery of
targeted treatment, tailored to individual tumour and patient characteristics, is
becoming a reality. This review summarises our current understanding of
HPV-positive OPC, drawing parallels from the role of HPV in the development of
cervical cancer. We also consider how knowledge of tumour HPV status may affect
the future management and prevention of OPC and discuss the need for future
collaborative trials in this important group of patients.

Copyright (c) 2010 The Royal College of Radiologists. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clon.2010.05.024 
PMID: 20584591  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
