

2845. Int J Mol Med. 2013 May;31(5):1262-72. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2013.1312. Epub 2013 Mar
20.

Silencing Bmi-1 expression by RNA interference suppresses the growth of laryngeal
carcinoma cells.

Yao XB(1), Wang XX, Liu H, Zhang SQ, Zhu HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, The First Affiliated
Hospital, School of Medicine, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061,
P.R. China. xiaobaoyaocn@126.com

The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of a B-cell-specific MLV
integration site-1 (Bmi-1) RNA interference (RNAi) expression vector on the
proliferation and invasiveness of laryngeal carcinoma. We constructed a
lentiviral vector expressing Bmi-1-specific short hairpin RNA (shRNA), and
transfected it into HEp-2 cells. Bmi-1 gene expression was detected by real-time 
RT-PCR and western blot analysis. We used flow cytometry and TUNEL assay to
analyze the apoptosis of transfected cells, and examined cellular growth in vitro
by MTT assay. We established an animal model and evaluated the therapeutic
effects of small interfering RNA (siRNA) against Bmi-1. siRNA against Bmi-1
significantly knocked down Bmi-1 expression in HEp-2 cells, induced cell cycle
arrest at the G1 phase, inhibited cell proliferation and promoted cell apoptosis.
Lentiviral Bmi-1-shRNA vector transfection also significantly reduced cell
migration. The formation and growth rate of xenograft tumors in mice transfected 
with siRNA against Bmi-1 was significantly reduced. The loss of mitochondrial
membrane potential, the release of cytochrome c from the mitochondria into the
cytosol, and the increased activity of caspase-3, -8 and -9 occurred
concomitantly with the inhibition of Bmi-1. Our data indicate that siRNA against 
Bmi-1 significantly suppresses tumor growth and induces apoptosis in vitro and in
vivo.

DOI: 10.3892/ijmm.2013.1312 
PMID: 23525303  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
