

2846. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 17;8(4):e60313. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060313. Print 2013.

Prognostic significance of EBV latent membrane protein 1 expression in lymphomas:
evidence from 15 studies.

Mao Y(1), Lu MP, Lin H, Zhang DW, Liu Y, Li QD, Lv ZG, Xu JR, Chen RJ, Zhu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Jiangsu Province Official 
Hospital, Nanjing, China.

BACKGROUND: Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection has been associated with lymphoma 
development. EBV latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) is essential for EBV-mediated
transformation and progression of different human cells, including lymphocytes.
This meta-analysis investigated LMP1 expression with prognosis of patients with
lymphoma.
METHODS: The electronic databases of PubMed, Embase, and Chinese Biomedicine
Databases were searched. There were 15 published studies available for a random
effects model analysis. Quality assessment was performed using the
Newcastle-Ottawa Quality Assessment Scale for cohort studies. A funnel plot was
used to investigate publication bias, and sources of heterogeneity were
identified by meta-regression analysis. The combined hazard ratios (HR) and their
corresponding 95% confidence intervals of LMP1 expression were calculated by
comparison to the overall survival.
RESULTS: Overall, there was no statistical significance found between LMP1
expression and survival of lymphoma patients (HR 1.25 [95% CI, 0.92-1.68]). In
subgroup analyses, LMP1 expression was associated with survival in patients with 
non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) (HR = 1.84, 95% CI: 1.02-3.34), but not with survival 
of patients with Hodgkin disease (HD) (HR = 1.03, 95% CI: 0.74-1.44). In
addition, significant heterogeneity was present and the meta-regression revealed 
that the outcome of analysis was mainly influenced by the cutoff value.
CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis demonstrated that LMP1 expression appears to be
an unfavorable prognostic factor for overall survival of NHL patients. The data
suggested that EBV infection and LMP1 expression may be an important factor for
NHL development or progression.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060313 
PMCID: PMC3629080
PMID: 23613723  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
