

2852. Oncotarget. 2014 Apr 15;5(7):1856-68.

ΔNp63 isoform-mediated β-defensin family up-regulation is associated with
(lymph)angiogenesis and poor prognosis in patients with squamous cell carcinoma.

Suarez-Carmona M(1), Hubert P, Gonzalez A, Duray A, Roncarati P, Erpicum C,
Boniver J, Castronovo V, Noel A, Saussez S, Peulen O, Delvenne P, Herfs M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Pathology, GIGA-Cancer, University of Liege, Liege,
Belgium.

Beside a role in normal development/differentiation, high p63 immunoreactivity is
also frequently observed in squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Due to the complexity 
of the gene, the role of each p63 isotype in tumorigenesis is still confusing.
Constitutively produced or induced in inflammatory conditions, human
beta-defensins (HβDs) are cationic peptides involved in host defenses against
bacteria, viruses and fungi. Here, we investigated both the role of p63 proteins 
in the regulation of HβDs and the implication of these antimicrobial peptides in 
tumor (lymph)angiogenesis. Thus, in contrast to TAp63 isotypes, we observed that 
ΔNp63 proteins (α, β, γ) induce HβD1, 2 and 4 expression. Similar results were
observed in cancer tissues and cell lines. We next demonstrated that
ΔNp63-overexpressing SCC are associated with both a poor prognosis and a high
tumor vascularisation and lymphangiogenesis. Moreover, we showed that HβDs exert 
a chemotactic activity for (lymphatic) endothelial cells in a CCR6-dependent
manner. The ability of HβDs to enhance (lymph)angiogenesis in vivo was also
evaluated. We observed that HβDs increase the vessel number and induce a
significant increase in relative vascular area compared to negative control.
Taken together, the results of this study suggest that ΔNp63-regulated HβD could 
promote tumor (lymph)angiogenesis in SCC microenvironment.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.1819 
PMCID: PMC4039122
PMID: 24732135  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
