

2861. Thromb Haemost. 2012 Mar;107(3):545-51. doi: 10.1160/TH11-08-05563. Epub 2012 Feb
8.

Reduced bone mineral density in patients with haemophilia A and B in Northern
Greece.

Anagnostis P(1), Vakalopoulou S, Slavakis A, Charizopoulou M, Kazantzidou E,
Chrysopoulou T, Vyzantiadis TA, Moka E, Agapidou A, Garipidou V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Hippokration Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece.
anagnwstis.pan@yahoo.gr

Comment in
    Eur J Haematol. 2013 May;90(5):435.

Haemophilia A and B has been associated with increased prevalence of low bone
mass (67-86%). The aim of this study was to estimate the prevalence of bone
disease in haemophiliacs and its association with potential risk factors. Adult
patients with haemophilia A and B followed-up in the Haemophilia Centre of
Northern Greece were included. Bone mineral density (BMD) was measured by
dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) in lumbar spine (LS), femoral neck (FN),
total hip (TH) and great trochanter (GT). One-hundred four male patients (aged
45.8 ± 15.1 years) and 50 controls (aged 44.9 ± 12.8 years) were screened. Low
BMD was diagnosed in 28 patients (26.9%) and 10 controls (20%) (p=0.0001).
Patients had lower BMD in TH (p=0.007), FN (p=0.029) and GT (p=0.008) than
controls, without differences in LS. BMD was positively associated with the
severity of haemophilia, history of herpes virus C or human immunodeficiency
virus and level of physical activity, and negatively with the level of
arthropathy. In multiple-regression analysis, only the level of physical activity
and 25-hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D] significantly predicted BMD. Half of the
patients had vitamin D deficiency. In conclusion, our study showed increased
prevalence of low BMD in haemophiliacs. The levels of physical activity and
25(OH)D independently predicted low BMD.

DOI: 10.1160/TH11-08-05563 
PMID: 22318743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
