

2862. Oral Oncol. 2012 Aug;48(8):703-8. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2012.02.003. Epub
2012 Feb 25.

Induction of lymphangiogenesis through vascular endothelial growth
factor-C/vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 3 axis and its correlation
with lymph node metastasis in nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Wakisaka N(1), Hirota K, Kondo S, Sawada-Kitamura S, Endo K, Murono S, Yoshizaki 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Otolaryngology, and Head & Neck Surgery, Graduate School of
Medicine, Kanazawa University, Takara-machi 13-1, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan.
wakisaka@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

The contribution of the lymphatic system to tumor metastasis is being
increasingly appreciated through studies of human cancers. As the biological
behavior of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) depends on its nodal status, patients 
with advanced nodal status show a higher tendency toward a poor outcome. Here, we
examined the role of lymphangiogenesis on lymphatic spread of NPC. We also
evaluated the involvement of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-C/VEGF
receptor 3 (VEGFR3) signaling pathway on lymphangiogenesis in NPC. Furthermore,
we tested whether Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-latent membrane protein (LMP) 1
induces VEGF-C. Forty-one patients with NPC were evaluated for expressions of
VEGF-C and its receptor, VEGFR3, and LMP1 proteins and lymphatic vessel counts
(LVC) highlighted by anti-podoplanin employing immunohistochemistry. The VEGF-C
induction by LMP1 was then tested with Western blotting and enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay in vitro. The LVC and VEGF-C expression were significantly
higher in cases with advanced regional lymph node metastasis (N2,3) than those
with no or limited lymph node involvement (N0,1) (p=0.0380 and p=0.0109,
respectively). In VEGF-C/VEGFR3-positive cases, the LVC were significantly
increased compared with VEGF-C/VEGFR3-negative cases (p=0.0007). However, LMP1
expression did not show significant associations with LVC and VEGF-C-expression
scores (p=0.1210 and p=0.1324, respectively). Induction of VEGF-C protein by LMP1
was not detected in vitro. These results suggest the involvement of the
VEGF-C/VEGFR3 axis in the induction of lymphangiogenesis which results in
lymphatic spread of NPC. However, EBV-LMP1 was not associated with the mechanism.

Copyright Â© 2012. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2012.02.003 
PMID: 22366442  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
