

2866. Support Care Cancer. 2010 Aug;18(8):993-1006. doi: 10.1007/s00520-010-0900-3.
Epub 2010 Jun 11.

A systematic review of viral infections associated with oral involvement in
cancer patients: a spotlight on Herpesviridea.

Elad S(1), Zadik Y, Hewson I, Hovan A, Correa ME, Logan R, Elting LS, Spijkervet 
FK, Brennan MT; Viral Infections Section, Oral Care Study Group, Multinational
Association of Supportive Care in Cancer (MASCC)/International Society of Oral
Oncology (ISOO).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Medicine, Hebrew University, Hadassah School of Dental
Medicine, Jerusalem, Israel. sharon.elad@ekmd.huji.ac.il

PURPOSE: Our aim was to evaluate the literature for the prevalence of and
interventions for oral viral infections and, based on scientific evidence, point 
to effective treatment protocols. Quality of life (QOL) and economic impact were 
assessed if available in the articles reviewed.
METHODS: Our search of the English literature focused on oral viral infections in
cancer patients within the timeframe of 1989-2007. Review methods were
standardized. Cohort studies were used to determine the weighted prevalence of
oral viral infection in cancer patients. The quality of selected articles were
assessed and scored with respect to sources of bias, representativeness, scale
validity, and sample size. Interventional studies were utilized to determine
management guidelines. Literature search included measures of QOL and economic
variables.
RESULTS: Prevalence of oral herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection in neutropenic
patients was higher than in patients treated with radiotherapy for head and neck 
cancer (49.8% vs. 0%, respectively). In patients treated with radiochemotherapy
for head and neck cancer, the prevalence of oral HSV infection increases up to
43.2% (CI, 0-100%). Prevalence of HSV infection was higher when oral ulcers
existed. Information about other oral viral infections is sparse. There was a
significant benefit of using acyclovir to prevent HSV oral infection (at 800
mg/day). Various dosing protocols of valacyclovir achieved prevention of HSV
reactivation (500 or 1,000 mg/day). The prevalence of HSV reactivation was
similar for acyclovir and valacyclovir. No information about impact on QOL and
economic burden was available.
CONCLUSIONS: Acyclovir and valacyclovir are equally effective in preventing oral 
HSV infection. Neutropenic patients, who were primarily treated for hematological
malignancies in the studies reviewed, are at a greater risk for viral infection.

DOI: 10.1007/s00520-010-0900-3 
PMID: 20544224  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
