

2869. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2015 Dec;272(12):3635-43. doi:
10.1007/s00405-014-3425-4. Epub 2014 Dec 7.

Toxic inner ear lesion following otitis media with effusion: a comparative
CT-study regarding the morphology of the inner ear.

Wilhelm T(1), Stelzer T(2), Wiegand S(3), G체ldner C(3), Teymoortash A(3), G체nzel 
T(4), Hagen R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head, Neck and Facial Plastic Surgery, Kliniken 
Leipziger Land, Klinikum Borna, Rudolf-Virchow-Str. 2, 04552, Borna, Germany.
thomas.wilhelm@kliniken-leipziger-land.de.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, Head, Neck and Facial Plastic Surgery, Kliniken 
Leipziger Land, Klinikum Borna, Rudolf-Virchow-Str. 2, 04552, Borna, Germany.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Philipps-University,
Marburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Borrom채us Hospital, Leer,
Germany.
(5)Department of Otolaryngology and Facial Plastic Surgery,
Julius-Maximilians-University, W체rzburg, Germany.

Viral infections of the upper respiratory airways can lead to a delayed viral
otitis media (VOM) caused by a diffusion of viruses/virus particles through the
round window membrane and resulting in sensorineural hearing loss. The treatment 
of choice is immediate paracentesis, evacuation of all fluids from the middle ear
cavity, and haemorrheological infusions. However, in some cases, persistent
symptoms may be an indication for a surgical approach using mastoidectomy. In
high-resolution computed tomography, an extended small-sized pneumatisation of
the mastoid cells with complete shading was found in these non-responsive cases. 
Therefore, a direct means of inner ear affliction through weak parts of the
labyrinthine bone may be hypothesised. Patients suffering from a toxic inner ear 
lesion (TIEL) following a common cold, treated over a 10-year period in a
Tertiary Care Centre (N = 52, 57 ears), were identified and the morphological
characteristics of the temporal bones of affected patients were examined by means
of high-resolution computed tomography (hrCT). The findings were compared with a 
matched control group of 64 normal ears (CONT). Measurements included the grade
of pneumatisation, distances within the temporal bones and Hounsfield units (HU) 
at defined anatomical structures. In the TIEL group, we found a small-sized
pneumatisation in 79.4 % and a medium-sized pneumatisation in 10.9 %, thus
differing from the CONT group and the literature data. Thickness of the bone wall
of the lateral semicircular canal (LSC) and distances within the aditus ad antrum
were significantly reduced in the TIEL group. HU's were markedly lower in the
TIEL group at the precochlea, the LSC, and dorsolateral to the promentia of the
LSC. There was a correlation between the HU's at the prominentia of the LSC and
the hearing loss (p = 0.002). Persisting interosseous globuli, as described in
1897 by Paul Manasse, form an osseochondral network within the otic capsule and
may be responsible for a direct means of toxic inner ear infection. The
CT-morphometric results support this thesis. In the group of these patients
(TIEL) a CT-scan and in non-responders to conservative treatment a surgical
approach by mastoidectomy is recommended.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-014-3425-4 
PMID: 25481029  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
