

2872. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2016 Oct 5;95(4):786-792. Epub 2016 Aug 15.

Point-of-Care Testing for Cryptococcal Disease Among Hospitalized Human
Immunodeficiency Virus-Infected Adults in Ethiopia.

Mamuye AT(1), Bornstein E(2), Temesgen O(3), Blumberg HM(4), Kempker RR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Health Sciences, Addis Ababa
University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. admasu.tenna@aau.edu.et
ethan.bornstein@ucdenver.edu.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Emory University
School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia. admasu.tenna@aau.edu.et
ethan.bornstein@ucdenver.edu.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Health Sciences, Addis Ababa
University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Emory University
School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia.

In a cross-sectional study among hospitalized human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV)-infected patients in Ethiopia, we sought to determine the rates and
predictors of cryptococcal disease and evaluate the test performance of a
recently introduced point-of-care test for Cryptococcus neoformans detection in
various biological samples. We tested serum, urine, and fingerstick blood samples
from each patient with a cryptococcal antigen lateral flow assay (CRAG LFA;
Immuno Mycologic Inc., Norman, OK). Cerebrospinal fluid was collected at the
discretion of the treating physician. Logistic regression was used to identify
risk factors for a positive test result. Agreement between different sample types
was also assessed. Among 198 hospitalized HIV-infected patients with a median CD4
count of 93 cells/mm3, 18 patients (9.1%) had a positive serum CRAG LFA. Of
these, 16 (8.1%) had confirmed cryptococcal meningitis (CM), all of whom had a
positive fingerstick blood LFA result. There was a very high agreement between
CRAG LFA tests in serum and fingerstick blood samples (κ = 0.97, 95% confidence
interval [CI] = 0.91-1.00); this was higher than that between serum and urine
samples (κ = 0.76, 95% CI = 0.58-0.93). A CD4 count < 100 cells/mm3 was
significantly associated with a positive CRAG LFA. The absence of fever,
headache, meningismus, and neck stiffness had a negative predictive value of 100%
for CM. In addition to finding high rates of cryptococcal disease, our study
demonstrated that the use of the LFA on fingerstick whole blood is less invasive,
and an effective method for CM case finding among hospitalized patients with HIV.

© The American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.15-0857 
PMCID: PMC5062773
PMID: 27527636  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
