

2873. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 May 15;7(6):3245-54. eCollection 2014.

Concurrent alterations of RAGE, RECK, and MMP9 protein expression are relevant to
Epstein-Barr virus infection, metastasis, and survival in nasopharyngeal
carcinoma.

Zhou DN(1), Deng YF(2), Li RH(3), Yin P(1), Ye CS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Zhongshan Hospital, Xiamen University Xiamen 361004, 
Fujian, China.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Zhongshan Hospital, Xiamen
University Xiamen 361004, Fujian, China ; Department of Otolaryngology-Head and
Neck Surgery, Union School of Clinical Medicine, Fujian Medical University Fuzhou
350001, Fujian, China.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Union School of Clinical
Medicine, Fujian Medical University Fuzhou 350001, Fujian, China.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Zhongshan Hospital, Xiamen
University Xiamen 361004, Fujian, China.

This study aimed to concurrently investigate the expressions of receptor for
advanced glycation end products (RAGE), reversion inducing cysteine-rich protein 
with Kazal motifs (RECK) and matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) in nasopharyngeal 
carcinoma (NPC) and their correlations with clinicopathological properties. Using
immunohistochemistry, we found that RECK expression was downregulated in NPC
tissues compared with chronic nasopharyngitis (CNT) tissues, while RAGE and MMP9 
expressions were upregulated. We further found that RECK expression level was
inversely correlated with MMP9 expression level in NPC, whereas RAGE expression
level was positively correlated with MMP9 expression level. Moreover, aberrant
expressions of these proteins had a positive correlation with the titers of
EBVCA-IgA, lymphatic metastasis, recurrence and survival. Together, these
findings suggest that dysregulations of RECK and RAGE expressions may be
collectively involved in tumor progression of NPC by regulating MMP9 expression
and that they may be a good prognostic predictors for NPC.


PMCID: PMC4097239
PMID: 25031745  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
