

2875. Diagn Pathol. 2018 Jun 9;13(1):39. doi: 10.1186/s13000-018-0713-0.

EBV-associated lymphoepithelioma-like thyroid carcinoma with favorable outcome:
case report with cytopathologic and histopathologic study.

Liu CY(1)(2), Huang SH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Sijhih Cathay General Hospital, No.2, Lane 59,
Jiancheng Road, Sijhih District, New Taipei City, 22174, Taiwan.
cyl1124@gmail.com.
(2)College of Medicine, Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei City, Taiwan.
cyl1124@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Pathology, Cathay General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma (LELC) is a rare entity among
thyroid tumors. Based on the limited number of case reports that exist, the
association of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) with primary thyroid LELCs seems
inconsistent.
CASE PRESENTATION: We present a confusing cytological case of
lymphoepithelioma-like thyroid carcinoma with expression of EBV. The patient
presented with a central neck mass and bilateral lymphadenopathy. Fine-needle
aspiration cytology revealed three-dimensional and syncytial fragments of
epithelioid cells accompanied by small lymphocytes. The surgical specimen of
resected thyroid tumor disclosed typical histopathological features of LELC.
Metastatic papillary carcinoma was also discovered in the metastatic lymph nodes.
In situ hybridization for EBV-encoded RNA (EBER-ISH) was positive in the tumor
cells. Negative immunoreactivity for TTF-1, Pax-8, and CD5 was observed. The
patient is currently undergoing regular follow-up and is 1 year and 10 months
postresection with no evidence of recurrence.
CONCLUSIONS: Long-term survival is discussed in relation to this variant of
thyroid carcinoma, which might differ in behavior from anaplastic carcinoma.
Further investigation is required to elucidate the clinical significance of EBV
expression and progression of this unique variant of thyroid carcinoma.

DOI: 10.1186/s13000-018-0713-0 
PMCID: PMC5994248
PMID: 29885658  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
