

2878. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2014 May;53(5):392-401. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22150. Epub
2014 Jan 31.

A selected group of large common fragile site genes have decreased expression in 
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas.

Gao G(1), Kasperbauer JL, Tombers NM, Wang V, Mayer K, Smith DI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Pathology, Department of Laboratory Medicine and
Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.

The common fragile sites (CFSs) are large regions of profound genomic instability
found in all individuals. The frequent deletions and other alterations in these
regions in multiple cancers has led to the discovery of a number of extremely
large genes contained within these regions and several of the large CFS genes
have already been demonstrated to function as tumor suppressors involved in the
formation of many different cancers. To study the large CFS genes in
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC), we did RNA seq analysis from 11
head and neck cancer patients. This revealed that there are six large CFS genes
which consistently had decreased expression in the tumor samples compared to
their matched normal tissues. These six genes are PARK2, DLG2, NBEA, CTNNA3, DMD,
and FHIT. PARK2 and FHIT are located within the two most frequently expressed
CFSs and both have been demonstrated to function as tumor suppressors, while the 
other large genes are found to have frequent alterations in multiple cancers.
Validation experiments using real time PCR indicated that over 60% of OPSCC
tumors showed decreased expression for all six genes. Both HPV-positive and
HPV-negative OPSCCs had similar proportions with loss of expression of these
genes. Our results suggest that this selected group of large genes might serve as
potential tumor suppressors involved in the development of OPSCCs. Further
studies are needed to investigate whether the decreased expression observed is
due to genomic instability within the CFS regions or the selection for
alterations of specific large CFS genes.

Copyright Â© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/gcc.22150 
PMID: 24481768  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
