

2879. Medicine (Baltimore). 2016 Feb;95(7):e2796. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000002796.

Cutaneous and Subcutaneous Metastases From Atypical Laryngeal Carcinoids: Case
Report and Review of the Literature.

Wang KR(1), Jia YJ, Zhou SH, Wang QY, Bao YY, Feng ZY, Yao HT, Fan J.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Anaesthesia (K-RW, Z-YF); Department of Otolaryngology 
(Y-JJ, S-HZ, Q-YW, Y-YB); Department of Pathology (H-TY); and State Key
Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, The First
Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang Province,
China (JF).

The incidence of cutaneous and subcutaneous metastases from atypical laryngeal
carcinoids is approximately 20%. However, the pathogenesis and natural history
of, and prognostic factors for, the condition remain poorly understood. We
reported a 54-year-old female presented with cutaneous and subcutaneous
metastases from atypical laryngeal carcinoid. Laryngoscopy revealed a
0.5 × 1.5-cm reddish mass on the laryngeal surface of the epiglottis. Under
general anesthesia, a biopsy sample was obtained via suspension laryngoscopy.
Routine pathology revealed atypical laryngeal carcinoid. Immunohistochemical
staining of the sections of primary tumor was positive for cytokeratin,
chromogranin A, synaptophysin, hypoxia-inducible factor-1α, P53, and CD56.
GLUT-1, p-Akt, and PI3K were negative. The Ki-67 index was 15%. Supraglottic
laryngectomy and selective right-neck dissection were performed. After 6 months, 
the patient complained of pain in the right wall of the chest; multiple cutaneous
and subcutaneous nodules were evident at that site and in the abdomen. An
abdominal nodule was biopsied and pathology revealed that the atypical metastatic
carcinoid had metastasized to both cutaneous and subcutaneous areas of the
abdomen. Chemotherapy was then prescribed. Currently, the intrathecal drug
delivery system remains in place. No local recurrence has been detected.
Furthermore, we systematically reviewed clinical manifestations of the disease,
pathogenesis, prognostic factors, and treatment. The metastasis rate (cutaneous
and subcutaneous) was approximately 12.2%. Thirty patients (62.5%) with cutaneous
and subcutaneous metastases exhibited contemporaneous lymph node invasion. The
3-, 5-, and 10-year survival rates were 44.0%, 22.0%, and 13.0%, respectively.
The prognosis of patients with atypical laryngeal carcinoids was poor. Relevant
prognostic factors included the level of p53, human papilloma virus status,
certain hypoxic markers, and distant metastasis. No optimal treatment for such
metastases has yet been defined.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000002796 
PMCID: PMC4998629
PMID: 26886629  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
