
Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.


2880. Autoimmun Rev. 2012 Dec;12(2):323-8. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2012.05.008. Epub 2012
Jun 8.

Bell's palsy and autoimmunity.

Greco A(1), Gallo A, Fusconi M, Marinelli C, Macri GF, de Vincentiis M.

Author information: 
(1)Head and Neck Department-ENT Department, Policlinico Umberto I University of
Rome Sapienza, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: To review our current knowledge of the etiopathogenesis of Bell's
palsy, including viral infection or autoimmunity, and to discuss disease
pathogenesis with respect to pharmacotherapy.
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW METHODOLOGY: Relevant publications on the etiopathogenesis,
clinical presentation, diagnosis and histopathology of Bell's palsy from 1975 to 
2012 were analysed.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Bell's palsy is an idiopathic peripheral nerve palsy
involving the facial nerve. It accounts for 60 to 75% of all cases of unilateral 
facial paralysis. The annual incidence of Bell's palsy is 15 to 30 per 100,000
people. The peak incidence occurs between the second and fourth decades (15 to 45
years). The aetiology of Bell's palsy is unknown but viral infection or
autoimmune disease has been postulated as possible pathomechanisms. Bell's palsy 
may be caused when latent herpes viruses (herpes simplex, herpes zoster) are
reactivated from cranial nerve ganglia. A cell-mediated autoimmune mechanism
against a myelin basic protein has been suggested for the pathogenesis of Bell's 
palsy. Bell's palsy may be an autoimmune demyelinating cranial neuritis, and in
most cases, it is a mononeuritic variant of Guillain-Barré syndrome, a neurologic
disorder with recognised cell-mediated immunity against peripheral nerve myelin
antigens. In Bell's palsy and GBS, a viral infection or the reactivation of a
latent virus may provoke an autoimmune reaction against peripheral nerve myelin
components, leading to the demyelination of cranial nerves, especially the facial
nerve. Given the safety profile of acyclovir, valacyclovir, and short-course oral
corticosteroids, patients who present within three days of the onset of symptoms 
should be offered combination therapy. However it seems logical that in fact,
steroids exert their beneficial effect via immunosuppressive action, as is the
case in some other autoimmune disorders. It is to be hoped that (monoclonal)
antibodies and/or T-cell immunotherapy might provide more specific treatment
guidelines in the management of Bell's palsy.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2012.05.008 
PMID: 22684016  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
