

2882. J Cutan Med Surg. 2009 Sep-Oct;13(5):257-61.

Skin and soft tissue abscess: 1 year's experience.

Nalmas S, Bishburg E, Shah M, Chan T.

BACKGROUND: The incidence of skin and soft tissue abscesses (SSTAs) has increased
owing to the emergence of community-acquired methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus (CA-MRSA). Some of these patients are treated as outpatients (OPs) and
some as inpatients (IPs).
OBJECTIVE: To review the microbiology and clinical features of SSTAs and the
clinical parameters that may have influenced clinicians to treat patients as IPs.
METHODS: The study was conducted in a 673-bed teaching hospital between January
and December 2005. A retrospective chart review of patients identified from a
microbiology culture log was conducted. Data were collected for demographics,
underlying disease, SSTA number and site, recurrence rates, and clinical
presentation.
RESULTS: One hundred thirty-eight patients were identified; 76 (55%) were female,
with a mean age of 42 years (range 18-80 years); 76 (55.5%) had no underlying
disease, 27 (19.6%) had diabetes, 20 (14.5%) had human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) infection, and 13 (9.4%) were intravenous drug users. Common SSTA sites
involved were the perineal area (43; 31.2%), upper extremities (35; 25.4%), lower
extremities (19; 13.8%), head and neck (14; 10.1%), chest (13; 9.4%), and abdomen
(8; 5.8%).
CONCLUSIONS: CA-MRSA was the most commonly isolated organism overall and in
patients treated as OPs. The decision to treat SSTA patients as IPs seems to be
influenced by SSTA number and site and the presence of fever at presentation.
SSTA number and site (variables that led to the decision to treat patients as
IPs) were confirmed by demonstrating statistical significance in the analysis
between the IP and OP groups, but the other determinant of admission, the
presence of fever at presentation, was based on chart review statements and not
confirmed by statistical analysis between the IP and OP groups.

DOI: 10.2310/7750.2009.08073 
PMID: 19769834  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
