

2884. Lin Chung Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2016 May 5;30(9):744-747. doi:
10.13201/j.issn.1001-1781.2016.09.019.

[Inhibition of PI3K-Akt pathway reverses LMP1 induced TRAIL resistance in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma cell].

[Article in Chinese]

Li SS(1), Yang S(1), Yin DH(1), Li P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, the Second Xiangya
Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, 410011, China.

Objective:To observe the role of PI3K-Akt pathway in epsterin barr virus latent
membrane protein 1(LMP1) induced TNF-related apoptosis inducing ligand(TRAIL)
resistance in nasopharyngeal carcinoma(NPC) cell. Method:Expressions of Akt and
p-Akt were detected after LMP1 overexpression by western blot. Colocation of LMP1
and p-Akt was detected by immunofluorescence. PI3K-Akt pathway was inhibited by
LY294002 in CNE 1 and CNE 1+ LMP1. Then TRAIL sensitivity of CNE 1+ LMP1 and CNE 
1 was analyzed by MTT and flow cytometric analysis, respectively. Activation of
cell extrinsic apoptotic pathway was analyzed by western blot. Result:The
expression of p-Akt in CNE 1+ LMP1 was higher than CNE 1. Immunofluorescence
showed that after LMP1 overexpression in CNE 1, p-Akt was translocated from
cytoplasm to membrane. With 1 μmol/ml LY294002 pretreatment for 8 hours, p-Akt
expression was both downregulated in CNE 1 and CNE 1+ LMP1, but there was no
significant difference between them(P >0.05). Moreover, the cytotoxicity and
apoptosis induced by TRAIL in CNE 1 were enhanced after LMP1 overexpression and
there was no significant difference between CNE 1 and CNE 1+ LMP1(P >0.05).
Conclusion:LMP1 induced TRAIL-resistance in NPC cell through activeting PI3K-Akt 
pathway, sug-gesting that therapy targeting PI3K-Akt pathway could reverse
TRAIL-resistance in NPC.

Copyright© by the Editorial Department of Journal of Clinical Otorhinolaryngology
Head and Neck Surgery.

DOI: 10.13201/j.issn.1001-1781.2016.09.019 
PMID: 29771028  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
