
Conflict of interest statement: The authors of this article and the planning
committee members and staff have no relevant financial relationships with
commercial interests to disclose.


2885. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2017 Jul;33(7):632-638. doi: 10.1089/AID.2016.0291.
Epub 2017 Feb 16.

Dual Raltegravir-Etravirine Combination as Maintenance Regimen in Virologically
Suppressed HIV-1-Infected Patients.

Calza L(1), Magistrelli E(1), Colangeli V(1), Manfredi R(1), Borderi M(1), Rossi 
N(1), Conti M(2), Mancini R(2), Viale P(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Clinics of Infectious Diseases,
"Alma Mater Studiorum" University of Bologna , S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital,
Bologna, Italy .
(2)2 Centralized Laboratory, "Alma Mater Studiorum" University of Bologna , S.
Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna, Italy .

Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NRTI)- and protease inhibitor
(PI)-sparing antiretroviral regimens may be useful in selected human immune
deficiency virus (HIV)-infected patients with resistance or intolerance to these 
drug classes. This was an observational prospective study of patients on
suppressive antiretroviral therapy containing two NRTIs plus one
ritonavir-boosted PI who switched to a dual regimen containing raltegravir plus
etravirine. Patients were required not to have prior virological failure to
raltegravir and to have efficacy of etravirine shown through the genotypic
resistance assay in case of prior non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor 
(NNRTI) virological failure. As a whole, 38 patients were enrolled. The mean
duration of current regimen was 4.3 years, and the reason for simplification was 
toxicity in 29 patients and resistance to NRTIs in 9 patients. After switching,
the percentage of patients with HIV RNA <20 copies/ml at week 48 was 81.6% in the
intent-to-treat-exposed analysis. The switch led to a significant reduction in
the mean serum triglyceride levels (-81.2 mg/dl), in the mean total cholesterol
levels (-44.3 mg/dl), and in the prevalence of tubular proteinuria (-30.2%), with
a significant increase in the mean phosphoremia (+0.52 mg/dl) and in both mean
lumbar and femoral neck bone mineral density (+6.5% and +4.7%, respectively). Two
patients (5.2%) had virological failure due to suboptimal adherence, and five
subjects (13.1%) discontinued treatment due to adverse events. In our study,
simplification to the dual-therapy raltegravir plus etravirine was associated
with a good efficacy and tolerability, in addition to a favorable effect on
kidney, bone, and serum lipids.

DOI: 10.1089/AID.2016.0291 
PMID: 28088884  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
