

2892. Int J Infect Dis. 2015 Sep;38:86-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2015.07.020. Epub 2015
Jul 29.

Disseminated Talaromyces marneffei and Mycobacterium intracellulare coinfection
in an HIV-infected patient.

Seok H(1), Ko JH(2), Shin I(1), Eun YH(1), Lee SE(1), Lee YB(1), Peck KR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan
University School of Medicine, 81 Irwon-ro, Gangnam-gu, Seoul 135-710, Republic
of Korea.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan
University School of Medicine, 81 Irwon-ro, Gangnam-gu, Seoul 135-710, Republic
of Korea.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan
University School of Medicine, 81 Irwon-ro, Gangnam-gu, Seoul 135-710, Republic
of Korea. Electronic address: krpeck@skku.edu.

A 25-year-old man with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection presented
with fever that had lasted 1 month. The CD4+ T lymphocyte count was 7 cells/μL
and computed tomography showed several small lung nodules, splenomegaly, and
multiple lymphadenopathy. Talaromyces marneffei was isolated in the initial blood
cultures. As the fever persisted despite clearance of fungemia and 10 days of
liposomal amphotericin B treatment, cervical lymph node fine-needle aspiration
was performed. Mycobacterium intracellulare was isolated from sputum and neck
node aspiration cultures. The patient was successfully treated with liposomal
amphotericin B, clarithromycin, and ethambutol in addition to antiretroviral
therapy. This case suggests that we should consider coinfection of opportunistic 
pathogens in febrile immunosuppressed patients if the patient does not respond
properly to the initial treatment.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijid.2015.07.020 
PMID: 26232630  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
