

2894. Burns. 2010 Sep;36(6):773-9. doi: 10.1016/j.burns.2009.11.007. Epub 2010 Jan 13.

Contribution of bacterial and viral infections to attributable mortality in
patients with severe burns: an autopsy series.

D'Avignon LC(1), Hogan BK, Murray CK, Loo FL, Hospenthal DR, Cancio LC, Kim SH,
Renz EM, Barillo D, Holcomb JB, Wade CE, Wolf SE.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease Service, San Antonio Military Medical Center, Brooke Army
Medical Center, 3851 Roger Brooke Drive, Fort Sam Houston, TX 78234, USA.
Laurie.Davigon@amedd.army.mil

Bacterial infections are a common cause of mortality in burn patients and viral
infections, notably herpes simplex virus (HSV) and cytomegalovirus (CMV) have
also been associated with mortality. This study is a retrospective review of all 
autopsy reports from patients with severe thermal burns treated at the US Army
Institute of Research (USAISR) burn unit over 12 years. The review focused on
those patients with death attributed to a bacterial or viral cause by autopsy
report. Of 3751 admissions, 228 patients died with 97 undergoing autopsy. Death
was attributed to bacteria for 27 patients and to virus for 5 patients. Bacterial
pathogens associated with mortality included Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Escherichia 
coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae and Staphylococcus aureus. This association with
mortality was independent of % total body surface area burn, % full-thickness
burn, inhalation injury, and day of death post-burn. Bloodstream infection was
the most common cause of bacteria related death (50%), followed by pneumonia
(44%) and wound infection (6%). Time to death following burn was < or =7 days in 
30%, < or =14 days in 59% and < or =21 days in 67%. All of the viral infections
associated with mortality involved the lower respiratory tract, HSV for 4 and CMV
for 1. Four of these 5 patients had evidence of inhalation injury by
bronchoscopy, all had facial and neck burns, and 2 had concomitant Staphylococcus
pneumonia. Time to death following burn ranged from 14 to 42 days for the 5
patients. Despite advances in care, gram negative bacterial infections and
infection with S. aureus remain the most common cause of bacteria related
mortality early in the hospital course. Viral infections are also associated with
mortality and numbers have remained stable when compared to data from prior
years.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.burns.2009.11.007 
PMID: 20074860  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
