

2899. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2017 Sep 13;11(9):e0005859. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0005859. eCollection 2017 Sep.

Clinical and epidemiologic characteristics of dengue and other etiologic agents
among patients with acute febrile illness, Puerto Rico, 2012-2015.

Tomashek KM(1), Lorenzi OD(1), Andújar-Pérez DA(2), Torres-Velásquez BC(1),
Hunsperger EA(1), Munoz-Jordan JL(1), Perez-Padilla J(1), Rivera A(1),
Gonzalez-Zeno GE(1), Sharp TM(1), Galloway RL(3), Glass Elrod M(3), Mathis DL(3),
Oberste MS(4), Nix WA(4), Henderson E(4), McQuiston J(5), Singleton J(5), Kato
C(5), García Gubern C(2), Santiago-Rivera W(2), Cruz-Correa J(2), Muns-Sosa R(6),
Ortiz-Rivera JD(6), Jiménez G(6), Galarza IE(2), Horiuchi K(7), Margolis HS(1),
Alvarado LI(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dengue Branch, Division of Vector-Borne Diseases, Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention (CDC), San Juan, Puerto Rico, United States of America.
(2)Ponce Health Sciences University/Saint Luke's Episcopal Hospital, Ponce,
Puerto Rico, United States of America.
(3)Bacterial Special Pathogens Branch, Zoonoses and Select Agent Laboratory, CDC,
Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America.
(4)Polio and Picornavirus Laboratory Branch, Division of Viral Diseases, National
Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC, Atlanta, Georgia, United
States of America.
(5)Rickettsial Zoonoses Branch, Division of Vector-Borne Diseases, CDC, Atlanta, 
Georgia, United States of America.
(6)Saint Luke's Episcopal Hospital, Guayama, Puerto Rico, United States of
America.
(7)Office of the Director, Division of Vector-Borne Diseases, CDC, Fort Collins, 
Colorado, United States of America.

Identifying etiologies of acute febrile illnesses (AFI) is challenging due to
non-specific presentation and limited availability of diagnostics. Prospective
AFI studies provide a methodology to describe the syndrome by age and etiology,
findings that can be used to develop case definitions and multiplexed diagnostics
to optimize management. We conducted a 3-year prospective AFI study in Puerto
Rico. Patients with fever ≤7 days were offered enrollment, and clinical data and 
specimens were collected at enrollment and upon discharge or follow-up. Blood and
oro-nasopharyngeal specimens were tested by RT-PCR and immunodiagnostic methods
for infection with dengue viruses (DENV) 1-4, chikungunya virus (CHIKV),
influenza A and B viruses (FLU A/B), 12 other respiratory viruses (ORV),
enterovirus, Leptospira spp., and Burkholderia pseudomallei. Clinical
presentation and laboratory findings of participants infected with DENV were
compared to those infected with CHIKV, FLU A/B, and ORV. Clinical predictors of
laboratory-positive dengue compared to all other AFI etiologies were determined
by age and day post-illness onset (DPO) at presentation. Of 8,996 participants
enrolled from May 7, 2012 through May 6, 2015, more than half (54.8%, 4,930) had 
a pathogen detected. Pathogens most frequently detected were CHIKV (1,635,
18.2%), FLU A/B (1,074, 11.9%), DENV 1-4 (970, 10.8%), and ORV (904, 10.3%).
Participants with DENV infection presented later and a higher proportion were
hospitalized than those with other diagnoses (46.7% versus 27.3% with ORV, 18.8% 
with FLU A/B, and 11.2% with CHIKV). Predictors of dengue in participants
presenting <3 DPO included leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, headache, eye pain,
nausea, and dizziness, while negative predictors were irritability and
rhinorrhea. Predictors of dengue in participants presenting 3-5 DPO were
leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, facial/neck erythema, nausea, eye pain, signs of
poor circulation, and diarrhea; presence of rhinorrhea, cough, and red
conjunctiva predicted non-dengue AFI. By enrolling febrile patients at clinical
presentation, we identified unbiased predictors of laboratory-positive dengue as 
compared to other common causes of AFI. These findings can be used to assist in
early identification of dengue patients, as well as direct anticipatory guidance 
and timely initiation of correct clinical management.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0005859 
PMCID: PMC5597097
PMID: 28902845  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
