

290. Oral Oncol. 2014 Sep;50(9):780-4. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2013.09.010. Epub
2013 Oct 11.

Tailored immunotherapy for HPV positive head and neck squamous cell cancer.

Gildener-Leapman N(1), Lee J(2), Ferris RL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University of Pittsburgh
Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA, United States. Electronic address:
gildenerleapmannr@upmc.edu.
(2)Sanford Ear, Nose, and Throat Clinic, Sioux Falls, SD, United States.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University of Pittsburgh
Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA, United States.

Human papilloma virus (HPV) associated oropharynx carcinoma (OPC) is increasingly
common, with a distinct biology from HPV negative OPC. In spite of this better
prognosis, morbidity is significant and treatment related after effects can be
debilitating. Because the foreign viral proteins that drive HPV+ cancers are
known, there are multiple options for tailored immune therapies. Herein we review
the immunologic basis for disease and emerging immune therapies. The oncogenesis 
of HPV+ SCCHN goes beyond cell cycle deregulation, and relies on the immune
escape through (E5, E6, and E7) downregulating antigen processing, interferon
response, as well as STAT-1 signaling. Individual susceptibilities to HPV
infection may vary. The treatment of HPV+ cancers has had a wide range of
successes and failures. Perhaps the shining example of immunoprevention has been 
the L1 protein vaccines developed for cervical cancer prevention, however this
vaccine has not been beneficial for people already infected. Therefore multiple
strategies have been employed in the cancer therapeutic realm for people with
existing disease. These agents range from peptides, to viral vectors, to adoptive
cell therapy. In this review we consider the work done in both SCCHN and cervical
cancer, as these therapeutic targets are the similar. The listed studies are not 
exhaustive, but rather illustrate experimental design and approach.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2013.09.010 
PMCID: PMC4437525
PMID: 24126224  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
