

2905. Pathol Oncol Res. 2011 Jun;17(2):397-402. doi: 10.1007/s12253-010-9312-4. Epub
2010 Oct 30.

Interdigitating dendritic cell sarcoma following adult liver transplantation:
case report and literature review.

Liu X(1), Deng Y, Zhang X, Mukherjee R, Huang W, Zhang G, Wang H, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, First Affiliated Hospital, Medical College of Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, China. liuxizgq@gmail.com

Interdigitating dendritic cell sarcoma is an extremely rare neoplasm derived from
professional antigen presenting cells. We report an unusual case of such a tumor 
occurring in a 61-year-old woman who had undergone orthotopic liver
transplantation for stage IVA2 primary hepatocellular carcinoma with a raised
preoperative Î±-fetoprotein level, followed by tacrolimus-based immunosuppressive 
therapy. During her subsequent management, the tacrolimus blood levels ranged
from 7.9 ng/mL to 16.1 ng/mL. Physical examination revealed bilateral neck and
left axillary lymphadenopathy. No evidence of either chronic hepatitis B virus or
Epstein-Barr virus could be detected in serum. An excisional biopsy of a right
neck lymph node was performed. Microscopically, the normal architecture was
diffusely effaced by a proliferation of spindled to ovoid cells arrayed in a
fascicular, ill-defined whorled pattern and small lymphocytes were admixed in
varying numbers with the tumor cells. Immunohistochemical studies showed that the
tumor cells were positive for S100 protein, vimentin and CD68. Based on these
findings, the case was diagnosed as an interdigitating dendritic cell sarcoma.
The patient unfortunately had no response to 2 cycles of CHOP chemotherapy
(cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone), and died of wide
spread disease 6 months after the original biopsy. We propose that
tacrolimus-based immunosuppression was associated with the development of
interdigitating dendritic cell sarcoma after liver transplantation in this case.

DOI: 10.1007/s12253-010-9312-4 
PMID: 21052884  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
