

2908. Calcif Tissue Int. 2012 Dec;91(6):423-9. doi: 10.1007/s00223-012-9653-y. Epub
2012 Oct 5.

Association between chronic hepatitis C virus infection and bone mineral density.

Lin JC(1), Hsieh TY, Wu CC, Chen PJ, Chueh TH, Chang WK, Chu HC.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, National Defense Medical Center,
Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.

Whether chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is a risk factor for the
development of bone disease has long been controversial. For this reason, chronic
HCV-infected participants (n = 69) were recruited into a prospective cohort study
and underwent dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry for determination of bone mineral 
density (BMD). Fibrosis staging was evaluated according to the noninvasive index 
FIB-4. T scores at the femoral neck and lumbar spine were used as the primary
outcome variables to assess the association between degree of liver disease and
BMD. The study cohort was 41 % male with a mean age of 53.6 years. The mean BMD, 
Z score, and T score values of lumbar spine in chronic hepatitis C (CHC) patients
were significantly lower than those in healthy controls (p < 0.001). The rate of 
osteoporosis for CHC patients aged 45-54 years was significantly higher than that
of the control group (p = 0.011). Bone alkaline phosphatase and C-terminal
cross-linking telopeptide of type I collagen levels were also significantly
higher in CHC patients with reduced BMD. Patients with more advanced liver
fibrosis had significantly lower BMD. In conclusion, reduced BMD is common in
this population of chronic HCV-infected patients and associated with liver
disease severity. This extrahepatic manifestation is probably secondary to
increased bone turnover in osteodystrophy pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00223-012-9653-y 
PMID: 23052227  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
