

2911. Semin Nucl Med. 2013 Sep;43(5):349-66. doi: 10.1053/j.semnuclmed.2013.04.008.

FDG-PET imaging in HIV infection and tuberculosis.

Sathekge M(1), Maes A, Van de Wiele C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South
Africa. mike.sathekge@up.ac.za

The intersection and syndemic interaction between the human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) and tuberculosis (TB) epidemics have global prevalence with
devastating morbidity and massive mortality. Using FDG-PET imaging it was shown
that in HIV-infected individuals, involvement of the head and neck precedes that 
of the chest and of the abdomen. The sequence of lymph node involvement observed 
suggests the existence of a diffusible activation mediator that may be targeted
via therapeutic intervention strategies. Furthermore, the degree of FDG uptake
proved directly related to viral load and inversely related to CD4 cell count.
Available data in acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS)-defining cancers
further suggest that FDG-PET/CT imaging may be useful for prognostication of
cervical cancer and for identifying appropriate sites for biopsy, staging, and
monitoring lymphoproliferative activity owing to HIV-associated Kaposi sarcoma
and multicentric Castleman disease. Inversely, in HIV-associated lymphoma, FDG
uptake in HIV-involved lymphoid tissue was shown to reduce the specificity of
FDG-PET imaging findings, the effect of which in clinical practice warrants
further investigation. In the latter setting, knowledge of viremia appears to be 
essential for FDG-PET image interpretation. Early HIV-associated neurocognitive
disorder, formerly known as AIDS dementia complex, proved to be characterized by 
striatal hypermetabolism and progressive HIV-associated neurocognitive disorder
or AIDS dementia complex by a decrease in subcortical and cortical metabolism. In
lipodystrophic HIV-infected individuals, lipodystrophy proved associated with
increased glucose uptake by adipose tissue, likely resulting from the metabolic
stress of adipose tissue in response to highly active antiretroviral therapy.
Furthermore, ongoing chronic low-grade infection in arteries of HIV-infected
individuals could be depicted by FDG-PET/CT imaging. And there is promising data 
that FDG-PET/CT in HIV may serve as a new marker for the evaluation of thymic
function in HIV-infected patients. In the setting of TB, FDG-PET has proven
unable to differentiate malignancy from TB in patients presenting with solitary
pulmonary nodules, including those suffering from HIV, and thus cannot be used as
a tool to reduce futile biopsy or thoracotomy in these patients. In patients
presenting with extrapulmonary TB, FDG-PET imaging was found to be significantly 
more efficient when compared with CT for the identification of more sites of
involvement. Thus supporting that FDG-PET/CT can demonstrate lesion extent, serve
as guide for biopsy with aspiration for culture, assist surgery planning and
contribute to follow-up. Limited available data suggest that quantitative FDG-PET
findings may allow for prediction or rapid assessment, at 4 months following
treatment instigation, of response to antituberculostatics in TB-infected HIV
patients. These results and more recent findings suggest a role for FDG-PET/CT
imaging in the evaluation of therapeutic response in TB patients.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.semnuclmed.2013.04.008 
PMID: 23905617  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
