

2912. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo). 2016;64(8):1118-23. doi: 10.1248/cpb.c16-00114.

The Safety and Immunological Effects of rAd5-EBV-LMP2 Vaccine in Nasopharyngeal
Carcinoma Patients: A Phase I Clinical Trial and Two-Year Follow-Up.

Si Y(1), Deng Z, Lan G, Du H, Wang Y, Si J, Wei J, Weng J, Qin Y, Huang B, Yang
Y, Qin Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Oncology, The People's Hospital of 
Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-encoded latent membrane protein 2 (LMP2) promotes
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) progression. Previously, we reported that the
dendritic cells (DCs) transfected with EBV-LMP2 recombinant serotype 5
adenoviruses (rAd5) induced anti-tumor effect by eliciting cytotoxic T
lymphocytes (CTLs)-mediated immune response in vitro and the adenoviral vaccine
of EBV-LMP2 (rAd5-EBV-LMP2) stimulated antigen-specific cellular immunity in
mice. However, the safety and immunological effect of rAd5-EBV-LMP2 vaccine in
human still remained unknown. Here we conducted a single-center, non-randomized, 
open-label, single-arm phase I clinical trial to clarify this unsolved issue. A
total of 24 patients with regional advanced NPC were sequentially enrolled into
three dose level groups (2×10(9), 2×10(10), 2×10(11) vp). The rAd5-EBV-LMP2
vaccines were intramuscularly injected for four times within 28 d (D0, D7, D14,
D28). Blood samples were harvested immediately before every vaccination, one week
and one month after the last vaccination (D0, D7, D14, D28, D35, D58). All the
vaccine inoculation-related toxicities presented as grade I/II adverse events.
The most frequent systemic adverse reactions were fatigue (33.0%, 8/24), myalgia 
(29.2%, 7/24) and cough (29.2%, 7/24), while the most common regional adverse
reaction was tenderness in the inoculation site (54.2%, 13/24). In addition,
proportion of CD(3+)CD(4+) cells in peripheral blood was significantly increased 
in the high dose group (2×10(11) vp). The rAd5-EBV-LMP2 vaccine was generally
well-tolerated and the high dose (2×10(11) vp) is recommended to be adopted in
phase II studies. The long-term outcome of rAd5-EBV-LMP2 vaccine inoculation is
required to be determined in following placebo-controlled trials.

DOI: 10.1248/cpb.c16-00114 
PMID: 27477649  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
