

2913. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Nov 15;15(22):6771-9. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-1052.
Epub 2009 Nov 3.

Production of interferon-{gamma}-inducible protein-10 and its role as an
autocrine invasion factor in nasal natural killer/T-cell lymphoma cells.

Moriai S(1), Takahara M, Ogino T, Nagato T, Kishibe K, Ishii H, Katayama A,
Shimizu N, Harabuchi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Asahikawa Medical College,
Asahikawa, Japan.

PURPOSE: Nasal natural killer (NK)/T-cell lymphoma is associated with
Epstein-Barr virus and has poor prognosis because of local invasion and/or
multiple dissemination. Recently, the role of chemokines/chemokine receptors in
tumor proliferation and invasion has been shown. In this study, we examined
whether the specific chemokines were related to the tumor behaviors in nasal
NK/T-cell lymphoma.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: A chemokine protein array was used to examine specific
chemokines produced by SNK-6 and SNT-8 (Epstein-Barr virus-positive nasal
NK/T-cell lymphoma lines). The expression of interferon gamma-inducible protein
10 (IP-10) and the IP-10 receptor CXCR3 was investigated by ELISA and flow
cytometry. Cell growth and invasion were assessed by the MTT and Matrigel
invasion assays, respectively. Immunohistologic staining and ELISA were used to
examine IP-10 expression in biopsies and sera from patients, respectively.
RESULTS: IP-10 was specifically produced by SNK-6 and SNT-8. Moreover, CXCR3 was 
expressed on the NK cell lines. Functionally, IP-10 did not affect cell
proliferation but enhanced cell invasion. In biopsy samples, IP-10 and CXCR3
expressions were detected in the lymphoma cells. Serum IP-10 levels in the
patients were much higher than those of healthy controls and the levels were
decreased during the complete remission phase after treatments.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that IP-10 may play an important role in cell 
invasion in nasal NK/T-cell lymphoma through an autocrine mechanism.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-1052 
PMID: 19887486  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
