

2915. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 Jul;94(27):e1035. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000001035.

The Stem Cell Marker Bmi-1 Is Sensitive in Identifying Early Lesions of Carcinoma
ex Pleomorphic Adenoma.

Sedassari BT(1), Rodrigues MF, Mariano FV, Altemani A, Nunes FD, Sousa S.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology, School of Dentistry, 
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil (BTS, MFSDR, FDN, SS); and Department 
of Anatomic Pathology, School of Medicine, State University of Campinas, São
Paulo, Brazil (FVM, AA).

In the present study, we evaluated and described the sensitivity of the stem cell
marker B cell-specific moloney murine leukemia virus integration site 1 (Bmi-1)
in identifying early lesions of carcinoma ex pleomorphic adenoma (CXPA). While
invasive CXPAs are tumors with a prominent and easily recognizable malignant
component, the identification of early carcinomatous changes in PA remains a
diagnostic challenge due to the lack of objective morphological criteria. The
immunohistochemical expression of Bmi-1 was assessed in both adenomatous and
carcinomatous components of 9 CXPA cases at an early phase of histological
progression (6 intracapsular and 3 minimally invasive) grouped according to the
cellular differentiation as luminal (7 cases) or myoepithelial (2 cases). A
selective nuclear expression of Bmi-1 was found exclusively in the malignant
component of 8 cases (6 luminal type and 2 myoepithelial type), including
intraductal carcinoma areas, except for 1 case in which scarce cells of the
remnant PA were positive. Thus, Bmi-1 is expressed from the earliest
morphologically detectable stages of PA malignant transformation. When faced with
atypical features in PA, evaluation of Bmi-1 expression can provide more
objective criteria for identification and diagnosis of early lesions of CXPA.
This is applied to carcinomas with luminal or myoepithelial differentiation.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000001035 
PMCID: PMC4504655
PMID: 26166073  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
