

2920. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2018 Jun 6;7(1):102. doi: 10.1038/s41426-018-0106-1.

Risk factors for extrapulmonary dissemination of tuberculosis and associated
mortality during treatment for extrapulmonary tuberculosis.

Qian X(1)(2)(3), Nguyen DT(4), Lyu J(1)(3), Albers AE(5), Bi X(2), Graviss EA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Laboratory Medicine, Ministry of Education, Zhejiang
Provincial Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Wenzhou Medical University,
Wenzhou, P. R. China.
(2)Center for Precision Biomedicine, Institute of Molecular Medicine, McGovern
Medical School, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston,
Houston, TX, USA.
(3)People's Hospital of Hangzhou Medical College, Hangzhou, P. R. China.
(4)Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston, TX, USA.
(5)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Berlin Institute of 
Health, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie
Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin,
Berlin, Germany.
(6)Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston, TX, USA.
eagraviss@houstonmethodist.org.

Many environmental, host, and microbial characteristics have been recognized as
risk factors for dissemination of extrapulmonary tuberculosis (EPTB). However,
there are few population-based studies investigating the association between the 
primary sites of tuberculosis (TB) infection and mortality during TB treatment.
De-identified population-based surveillance data of confirmed TB patients
reported from 2009 to 2015 in Texas, USA, were analyzed. Regression analyses were
used to determine the risk factors for EPTB, as well as its subsite distribution 
and mortality. We analyzed 7007 patients with exclusively pulmonary TB, 1259
patients with exclusively EPTB, and 894 EPTB patients with reported concomitant
pulmonary involvement. Age ≥45 years, female gender, human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV)-positive status, and end-stage renal disease (ESRD) were associated with
EPTB. ESRD was associated with the most clinical presentations of EPTB other than
meningeal and genitourinary TB. Patients age ≥45 years had a disproportionately
high rate of bone TB, while foreign-born patients had increased pleural TB and
HIV+ patients had increased meningeal TB. Age ≥45 years, HIV+ status, excessive
alcohol use within the past 12 months, ESRD, and abnormal chest radiographs were 
independent risk factors for EPTB mortality during TB treatment. The
epidemiologic risk factors identified by multivariate analyses provide new
information that may be useful to health professionals in managing patients with 
EPTB.

DOI: 10.1038/s41426-018-0106-1 
PMCID: PMC5988830
PMID: 29872046  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
