

2923. Oncol Rep. 2014 Aug;32(2):668-76. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3225. Epub 2014 May 30.

Imatinib-associated matrix metalloproteinase suppression in p16-positive squamous
cell carcinoma compared to HPV-negative HNSCC cells in vitro.

Umbreit C(1), Aderhold C(1), Faber A(1), Sauter A(1), Hofheinz RD(2),
Stern-Straeter J(1), Hoermann K(1), Schultz JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital 
Mannheim, D-68167 Mannheim, Germany.
(2)Department of Hematology and Oncology, University Hospital Mannheim, D-68167
Mannheim, Germany.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most common type of
cancer worldwide. The growth and invasion of HNSCC are strongly influenced by the
extracellular matrix (ECM), which is modified by matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs). The MMP family is still relevant to cancer research, as it promotes
malignant transformation, cell proliferation and modulation of angiogenesis even 
in the early stages of cancer. The proteolytic processing of bioactive molecules 
by MMP-14 (MT1-MMP) causes severe abnormalities in connective tissue, defective
angiogenesis and premature death. MMP-2 (gelatinase A) and MMP-14 also play a
role in degradation of basement membrane and cell carcinoma invasion. Imatinib
blocks the PTK receptor c-kit and forestalls its PTK activity. The aim of the
present study was to investigate the expression pattern of MMP-14 and MMP-2 in
human papilloma virus (HPV)-negative and p16-positive SCC and to evaluate the
chemosensitivity of the tumour cells to the chemotherapeutic agents, imatinib and
5-fluorouracil (5-FU). We incubated the SCC cell lines with imatinib (18 and 30
µmol/ml) and 5-FU (1 and 5 µmol/ml) and detected MMP-14 and MMP-2 by
immunohistochemistry and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) after 48, 72, 
120, 192 and 240 h. We detected expression of MMP-2 and MMP-14 in all incubated
tumour cell lines. With imatinib in particular, we found a reliable trend towards
decreased MMP-2 and MMP-14 expression levels in p16-positive and p16-negative SCC
tumour cell lines in addition to an induced apoptotic effect. We found
statistically significant imatinib-induced suppression of MMP-2- and MMP-14,
dependent on the incubation time and the cell line. We detected a significant
suppression of MMP-2 and MMP-14 especially in p16-negative HNSCC14C cells after
prolonged treatment time with imatinib. Dose escalation of imatinib and 5-FU had 
no statistically significant effect on the expression of MMP-2 or MMP-14. The
p16-positive SCC cells exhibited higher expression of total protein. We detected 
a significant suppression of MMP-2 and MMP-14 in all the incubated SCC cell
lines, partially after treatment with imatinib. We found higher suppression of
MMP-2 in the CERV196 cells after incubation with imatinib. We detected a reliable
trend towards increased chemosensitivity of p16-positive tumour cells in vitro
after treatment with imatinib. Extended studies and clinical trials are needed to
further investigate these findings in HPV-associated HNSCC.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2014.3225 
PMID: 24890748  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
