

2924. Surgery. 2012 Sep;152(3):431-40. doi: 10.1016/j.surg.2012.05.035. Epub 2012 Jul
6.

Cetuximab therapy in head and neck cancer: immune modulation with interleukin-12 
and other natural killer cell-activating cytokines.

Luedke E(1), Jaime-Ramirez AC, Bhave N, Roda J, Choudhary MM, Kumar B, Teknos TN,
Carson WE 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

BACKGROUND: Squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN) is the sixth
most common cancer worldwide. Greater than 90% of SCCHN of the oropharynx
overexpress the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR or HER1). Cetuximab
(Erbitux-TM) is a humanized anti-HER1 monoclonal antibody (mAb) that binds to
HER1 overexpressing tumor cells. Cetuximab has a direct effect on HER1-positive
cancer cells, but it also can activate immune cells that bear receptors for the
Fc (constant portion) of IgG such as natural killer (NK) cells. NK cells have an 
activating Fc receptor for IgG (FcγRIIIa), which mediates Ab dependent cellular
cytotoxicity (ADCC) and enhances production of interferon-γ (IFN-γ) in response
to Ab-coated targets. Interleukin-12 (IL-12) is a cytokine produced by
antigen-presenting cells that stimulates IFN-γ production from NK cells. We
hypothesized that IL-12 would enhance the anti-tumor activity of cetuximab by
activating the FcR effector mechanisms of NK cells.
METHODS: Expression of HER1 was measured on human papilloma virus (HPV)-positive 
(UD-SCC2, UM-SCC47) and HPV-negative (Cal27, UM-SCC74B) SCCHN cell lines by
immunoblot analysis and flow cytometry. NK cells from normal donors were treated 
overnight with IL-2 (100 U), IL-12, IL-15, or IL-21 (all 10 ng/mL) and tested for
ADCC versus cetuximab-coated cancer cells in a 4 hr (51)Cr assay. Release of
cytokines by NK cells in response to cetuximab-coated cells was measured by
ELISA. Phosphorylation of the ERK transcription factor in NK cells was measured
by flow cytometry. The efficacy of combination therapy with cetuximab plus IL-12 
was evaluated in a murine tumor model of head and neck cancer.
RESULTS: All cell lines showed >99% expression of HER1 by flow cytometry and
immunoblot analysis except UM-SCC74B (73%). Normal NK cells mediated 49.4% lysis 
of cetuximab-coated SCCHN cell lines as compared to 7.6% lysis of cells treated
with control IgG (P = .0002). NK cell lysis of cetuximab-coated SCCHN cells was
markedly enhanced by 12 hr pre-treatment of NK cells with IL-12 (71.6% lysis, P =
.005 vs cetuximab alone). As a control, IL-12-activated NK cells were tested
against IgG-treated cells. ADCC under these conditions was just 21.7%. Similar
levels of lysis were noted for both HPV-positive and HPV-negative and cell lines.
Other NK cell activating factors such as IL-2, IL-15, and IL-21 were also able to
enhance NK cell ADCC. The stimulus of IL-12 and cetuximab-coated tumor cells
induced the synergistic production of nanogram levels of IFN-γ (>6-fold increase 
over controls) (P < .001). A similar effect was seen for NK cell production of
the chemokines RANTES, MIP-1α, and IL-8. Phosphorylation of ERK (which is
critical for FcR-mediated ADCC and cytokine production) was enhanced in NK cells 
exposed to IL-12 and IgG as compared to control conditions. The combination of
cetuximab plus IL-12 resulted in a reduction in tumor burden when compared to
either agent alone in a murine xenograft model of SCCHN.
CONCLUSION: Cytokine stimulation of NK cells in the presence of cetuximab-coated 
head and neck cancer cells leads to enhanced NK cell mediated ADCC and cytokine
secretion independent of tumor cell HPV-status. Cytokine administration could be 
a useful adjuvant in the cetuximab treatment of HER1-positive head and neck
cancer.

Copyright © 2012 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.surg.2012.05.035 
PMCID: PMC3432674
PMID: 22770960  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
