

2925. Head Neck Pathol. 2012 Sep;6(3):336-44. doi: 10.1007/s12105-012-0355-6. Epub 2012
Apr 15.

HPV positive squamous cell carcinoma of the oropharynx. Are we observing an
unusual pattern of metastases?

MÃ¼ller S(1), Khuri FR, Kono SA, Beitler JJ, Shin DM, Saba NF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA. susan.muller@emory.org

To describe the clinical, histopathologic, immunohistochemical and molecular
features of human papilloma virus (HPV)+ squamous cell carcinomas of the
oropharynx that had an atypical clinical course.METHODS AND RESULTS: Four
patients with HPV+ oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) were identified 
retrospectively based on unanticipated clinical behavior. The histopathology,
immunohistochemistry and molecular studies of both the primary tumor and the
metastases were analyzed to look for any predictors to explain the clinical
course. The four patients were all male (average age 55) who presented initially 
with a neck mass and had stage IVA disease. Three of the primary tumors were
nonkeratinizing squamous cell carcinoma and one case was a hybrid tumor of both
high-grade squamous cell carcinoma and nonkeratinizing type, and all were p16 and
HPV 16/18 positive. All patients received concurrent chemoradiation as primary
therapy and had a complete response. Disease-free survival ranged from 7 to 15
months and metastases in 3 patients occurred only in bone, including the sternum,
humerus, clavicle, and vertebrae. In one patient, distant metastases were
identified in the pancreas, liver, lung and skull base. All metastatic lesions
were nonkeratinizing morphology and were p16 and/or HPV positive. Two patients
died of their disease, one patient is alive with disease and one patient is
disease-free. Although infrequent, unanticipated clinical outcomes can occur in
HPV-related OPSCC including distant metastases and bone-only metastases. The
tumor morphology of the metastases was comparable to the primary and retained p16
and HPV expression.

DOI: 10.1007/s12105-012-0355-6 
PMCID: PMC3422578
PMID: 22528827  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
