

2928. Hear Res. 2012 Jul;289(1-2):86-97. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2012.04.007. Epub 2012
Apr 28.

Stable release of BDNF from the fibroblast cell line NIH3T3 grown on silicone
elastomers enhances survival of spiral ganglion cells in vitro and in vivo.

Warnecke A(1), Sasse S, Wenzel GI, Hoffmann A, Gross G, Paasche G, Scheper V,
Reich U, Esser KH, Lenarz T, Stöver T, Wissel K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Hannover Medical
School, Carl-Neuberg-Str 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.
warnecke.athanasia@mh-hannover.de

The treatment of choice for profound sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) is direct 
electrical stimulation of spiral ganglion cells (SGC) via a cochlear implant
(CI). The number and excitability of SGC seem to be critical for the success that
can be achieved via CI treatment. However, SNHL is associated with degeneration
of SGC. Long-term drug delivery to the inner ear for improving SGC survival may
be achieved by functionalisation of CI electrodes with cells providing growth
factors. Therefore, the capacity of brain-derived neurotrophic factor
(BDNF)-secreting NIH3T3 cells grown on cylindrically shaped silicone elastomers
(SE) to exert local and sustained neuroprotective effects was assessed in vitro
and in vivo. An in vitro model to investigate adhesion and cell growth of
lentivirally modified NIH3T3 cells synthesising BDNF on SE was established. The
bioactivity of BDNF was characterised by co-cultivation of SGC with cell-coated
SE. In addition, cell-coated SE were implanted into deafened guinea pigs. The
recombinant NIH3T3 cells proliferated on silicone surfaces during 14 days of
cultivation and expressed significantly increasing BDNF levels. Enhanced survival
rates and neurite outgrowth of SGC demonstrated the bioactivity of BDNF in vitro.
Implantation of SE with adhering BDNF-secreting NIH3T3 cells into the cochleae of
systemically deafened guinea pigs induced a significant increase in SGC survival 
in comparison to SE without cell coating. Our data demonstrate a novel approach
of cell-based long-term drug delivery to support SGC survival in vitro and in
vivo. This therapeutic strategy--once transferred to cells suitable for clinical 
application--may improve CI performance.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heares.2012.04.007 
PMID: 22564255  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
