

2933. Scand J Infect Dis. 2012 Jul;44(7):481-8. doi: 10.3109/00365548.2012.664776. Epub
2012 Mar 11.

Spontaneous intracranial hypotension syndrome may mimic aseptic meningitis.

Balkan II(1), Albayram S, Ozaras R, Yilmaz MH, Ozbayrak M, Mete B, Yemisen M,
Tabak F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Clinical Microbiology, Cerrahpasa
Medical School, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Spontaneous intracranial hypotension (SIH) is recognized with
increasing frequency. A throbbing headache occurring or worsening in the upright 
position and improving after lying down, a so-called 'orthostatic headache', low 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pressure, and diffuse pachymeningeal enhancement on
brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are the major features of the classic
syndrome. These patients, who are admitted with fever, headache, and CSF findings
revealing lymphocytic pleocytosis, elevated protein concentration, normal glucose
levels, and negative culture results, are prone to be misdiagnosed with aseptic
meningitis. The aims of this single-centre retrospective study were to determine 
the epidemiological, clinical, laboratory, and radiological features of patients 
initially evaluated as having aseptic meningitis but subsequently diagnosed with 
SIH, and to touch upon the key points of the differential diagnosis in daily
infectious diseases practice.
METHODS: Patients referred to Cerrahpasa Medical School with a presumed diagnosis
of aseptic meningitis or viral meningitis between 1 January 2006 and 1 January
2011 were reviewed. Epidemiological, clinical, laboratory, radiological, and
follow-up data obtained from the hospital database were processed. Patients
confirmed to have SIH syndrome were included for evaluation.
RESULTS: Eleven cases of SIH syndrome were diagnosed during the study period (8
male and 3 female, median age 30 y, range 21-44 y). All had headache, hearing
changes, and nausea. Vomiting (10/11) and posterior neck pain (9/11) were also
frequent. Seven had fever and 5 had a stiff neck. Four cases had lymphocytic
pleocytosis, 4 cases had elevated CSF protein concentrations (> 1.5 times the
upper limit of normal), and 2 cases had slightly lower CSF glucose levels.
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analyses of the CSF for Mycobacterium
tuberculosis complex, herpes simplex viruses 1 and 2, and enteroviruses were
negative in all cases. MRI of the 11 cases revealed signs of spontaneous CSF
leaks with diffuse pachymeningeal gadolinium enhancement (11/11), sagging of the 
brain (9/11), enlargement of the pituitary (6/11), engorgement of the venous
structures (5/11), and subdural fluid collections (2/11). CSF leaks were
demonstrated by intrathecal magnetic resonance or computed tomography myelography
at different levels along the thoracic spine (7/11), cervico-thoracic junction
(2/11), and thoraco-lumbar junction (2/11). Autologous blood injection into the
spinal epidural space ('blood patch') was performed for treatment. Strict bed
rest followed, and all patients recovered fully within a week; no recurrence or
complication was observed during the follow-up periods, which ranged from 6
months to 5 y.
CONCLUSIONS: Findings of fever, headache, and meningeal irritation are generally 
accepted as the clinical features of meningitis. When CSF findings are not
characteristically compatible with bacterial meningitis and particularly when the
headache is orthostatic in nature, SIH should also be included in the
differential diagnosis. MRI findings are characteristic and clearly contribute to
the differential diagnosis between viral meningitis and SIH.

DOI: 10.3109/00365548.2012.664776 
PMID: 22404365  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
