

2934. Head Neck Pathol. 2011 Dec;5(4):327-34. doi: 10.1007/s12105-011-0278-7. Epub 2011
Jun 23.

Lymphoepithelial carcinoma: two case reports and a systematic review of oral and 
sinonasal cases.

Rytkönen AE(1), Hirvikoski PP, Salo TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostics and Oral Medicine, Institute of Dentistry, Oulu
University Hospital, University of Oulu, PO Box 5281, 90014 Oulu, Finland.

Lymphoepithelial carcinoma (LEC) is a rare malignancy. Histologically, it is an
undifferentiated carcinoma with an intermixed reactive lymphoplasmacytic
infiltrate. Herein, we report two cases of LEC in the head and neck region that
presented to Oulu University Hospital. Our first case is a 30-year-old man with
LEC in the left maxillary sinus. The second case is a 49-year-old man with LEC in
the soft palate and uvula with regional lymph node metastases at diagnosis. In
addition, a systematic review of the literature from 1980 to 2010 was performed
with MEDLINE and cross-references were searched manually. Case reports and
clinical series of oral, oropharyngeal, nasal, and paranasal sinus LECs were
reviewed revealing a total of 110 cases. Most of the oral cases were found in the
tonsils (n = 29), oropharynx (n = 19), and in oral mucosa (n = 18), while
sinonasal cases (n = 40) were mainly in the paranasal sinuses and nasal cavity.
From 37 case reports, including ours, the median age was 58 and 62 years for
sinonasal and oral/oropharyngeal LECs, respectively. Oral and oropharyngeal LECs 
have a 70.0% tendency to metastasize and 16.6% spread locally. In contrast, none 
of the nasal and paranasal LECs metastasized, but 60% spread locally.
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) had been detected in 87.5% of all tested LEC cases.
Treatment of LECs, during the last decade, has largely consisted of surgery,
combined with radiotherapy or chemoradiation. Although local spread or nodal
metastases are fairly common at the time of diagnosis, the mortality rate of
adequately treated LEC patients is low.

DOI: 10.1007/s12105-011-0278-7 
PMCID: PMC3210216
PMID: 21698444  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
