

2940. JAMA Dermatol. 2013 Apr;149(4):446-9. doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2013.2032.

Intractable localized pruritus as the sole manifestation of intramedullary tumor 
in a child: case report and review of the literature.

Soltani-Arabshahi R(1), Vanderhooft S, Hansen CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84109, USA. 
razi.soltani@hsc.utah.edu

IMPORTANCE: Persistent localized pruritus is a rare manifestation of central
nervous system tumors. Delayed diagnosis can lead to devastating complications.
OBSERVATIONS: We report an otherwise healthy 19-month-old girl who presented with
signs of localized intractable pruritus of 6 months' duration on the left side of
the neck, shoulder, and arm, resistant to systemic antihistamines and topical
corticosteroids. Findings from skin biopsy, viral culture for varicella-zoster
virus, and skin prick test to common food and animal allergens were
nondiagnostic. Neurologic examination results were unremarkable. After several
months of localized intractable pruritus, magnetic resonance imaging of the
cervical spine with and without contrast was performed, which revealed an
intramedullary spinal cord tumor extending from just above the foramen magnum to 
C6. The tumor was surgically resected and found to be a ganglioglioma. Within a
week after the surgery her pruritus completely resolved.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: We recommend a detailed neurologic examination in any 
case of persistent localized pruritus, in the absence of primary dermatologic
causes. Given the challenges of performing a reliable neurologic examination in
children, neuroimaging might be considered in children with intractable localized
pruritus of unknown etiology of the head and neck or upper extremity, even in the
absence of focal neurologic deficits.

DOI: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2013.2032 
PMID: 23715513  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
