

2943. Ren Fail. 2013 Sep;35(8):1182-5. doi: 10.3109/0886022X.2013.815568. Epub 2013 Jul
23.

Long-term response to peginterferon in hepatitis C virus-associated nephrotic
syndrome from focal segmental glomerulosclerosis.

Shah HH(1), Patel C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Kidney Diseases and Hypertension, Department of Medicine, North
Shore University Hospital and Long Island Jewish Medical Center, Hofstra North
Shore-LIJ School of Medicine, Great Neck, NY 11021, USA. hshah2@nshs.edu

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is a global public health problem. Chronic HCV 
infection is an important cause of chronic liver disease. Since the first
reported association between HCV and membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis
(MPGN) in 1993, HCV has been described with other types of glomerular diseases,
although less frequently. Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) is one such
glomerular disease that has been rarely reported in association with HCV.
Antiviral therapy with interferon and ribavirin has been shown to be beneficial
in HCV-associated MPGN. The optimal therapy of HCV-associated FSGS is not
currently known. To our knowledge, long-term response to pegylated interferon
monotherapy in treatment of HCV-associated FSGS has not been reported. We report 
an adult patient with HCV-associated FSGS who presented with nephrotic syndrome
and renal failure. Treatment with pegylated interferon alfa-2a monotherapy
resulted in sustained virological response with a clinical remission of nephrotic
syndrome and stabilization of renal function. Patient continued to remain in
clinical remission of nephrotic syndrome with stable renal function, 5 years
after treatment. We also briefly review the literature on HCV-associated
glomerular diseases, particularly HCV-associated FSGS.

DOI: 10.3109/0886022X.2013.815568 
PMID: 23879705  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
