

2944. J Control Release. 2012 Jan 30;157(2):305-13. doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2011.08.025.
Epub 2011 Aug 25.

Photochemical internalisation of a macromolecular protein toxin using a cell
penetrating peptide-photosensitiser conjugate.

Wang JT(1), Giuntini F, Eggleston IM, Bown SG, MacRobert AJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Medical Laser Centre, Division of Surgery & Interventional Science,
University College Medical School, University College London, London, UK.

Photochemical internalisation (PCI) is a site-specific technique for improving
cellular delivery of macromolecular drugs. In this study, a cell penetrating
peptide, containing the core HIV-1 Tat 48-57 sequence, conjugated with a
porphyrin photosensitiser has been shown to be effective for PCI. Herein we
report an investigation of the photophysical and photobiological properties of a 
water soluble bioconjugate of the cationic Tat peptide with a hydrophobic
tetraphenylporphyrin derivative. The cellular uptake and localisation of the
amphiphilic bioconjugate was examined in the HN5 human head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma cell line. Efficient cellular uptake and localisation in
endo/lysosomal vesicles was found using fluorescence detection, and
light-induced, rupture of the vesicles resulting in a more diffuse intracellular 
fluorescence distribution was observed. Conjugation of the Tat sequence with a
hydrophobic porphyrin thus enables cellular delivery of an amphiphilic
photosensitiser which can then localise in endo/lysosomal membranes, as required 
for effective PCI treatment. PCI efficacy was tested in combination with a
protein toxin, saporin, and a significant reduction in cell viability was
measured versus saporin or photosensitiser treatment alone. This study
demonstrates that the cell penetrating peptide-photosensitiser bioconjugation
strategy is a promising and versatile approach for enhancing the therapeutic
potential of bioactive agents through photochemical internalisation.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2011.08.025 
PMID: 21889554  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
