

2946. Pathol Int. 2017 Sep;67(9):461-466. doi: 10.1111/pin.12561. Epub 2017 Jul 16.

Expression of interferon regulatory factor 7 correlates with the expression of
Epstein-Barr Virus latent membrane protein 1 and cervical lymph node metastasis
in nasopharyngeal cancer.

Kondo S(1), Endo K(1), Wakisaka N(1), Aga M(1), Kano M(1), Seishima N(1), Imoto
T(1), Kobayashi E(1), Moriyama-Kita M(1), Nakanishi Y(1), Murono S(2), Pagano
JS(3), Yoshizaki T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Graduate School of Medical
Science, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, Fukushima Medical University, Fukushima,
Fukushima, Japan.
(3)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center and Departments of Medicine and
Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, NC 27599-7295, USA.

Interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) has oncogenic properties in several
malignancies such as Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated lymphoma. However, there
is no evidence whether IRF7 is associated with the oncogenesis of nasopharyngeal 
cancer (NPC), the pathogenesis of which is closely associated with EBV. Herein,
we report that expression of IRF7 was increased in normal nasopharyngeal cells
that expressed the EBV principal oncoprotein, latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1).
In addition, IRF7 was mainly expressed in the nucleus in both normal
nasopharyngeal cells and nasopharyngeal cancer cells that expresses LMP1. On
immunohistochemical analysis, IRF7 was predominantly localized in the nucleus in 
biopsy samples of NPC tissues. In total, IRF7 expression was detected with 36 of 
49 specimens of these tissues. Furthermore, the expression score of IRF7
correlated with the expression score of LMP1. Moreover, the expression score of
IRF7 is associated with cervical lymph-node metastasis, which reflects the highly
metastatic nature of this cancer. Taken together, our results suggest that
expression of IRF7 is one of the metastatic effectors of LMP1 signalling in
EBV-associated NPC.

Â© 2017 Japanese Society of Pathology and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pin.12561 
PMID: 28712115  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
