

2949. Hum Pathol. 2015 Mar;46(3):443-53. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.12.001. Epub 2014 
Dec 23.

Merkel cell carcinoma: histopathologic and prognostic features according to the
immunohistochemical expression of Merkel cell polyomavirus large T antigen
correlated with viral load.

Leroux-Kozal V(1), Lévêque N(2), Brodard V(3), Lesage C(4), Dudez O(5), Makeieff 
M(6), Kanagaratnam L(7), Diebold MD(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Robert Debré University
Hospital, 51092 Reims, France. Electronic address: lerouxvaleri@gmail.com.
(2)Clinical and Molecular Virology Unit, University Hospital, 51092 Reims,
France; Faculty of Medicine, EA-4684 Cardiovir SFR-CAP Santé, 51092 Reims,
France.
(3)Clinical and Molecular Virology Unit, University Hospital, 51092 Reims,
France.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Robert Debré University Hospital, 51092 Reims,
France.
(5)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Robert Debré University
Hospital, 51092 Reims, France.
(6)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Robert Debré University
Hospital, 51092 Reims, France.
(7)Department of Research and Innovation, Robert Debré University Hospital, 51092
Reims, France.

Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is a neuroendocrine skin malignancy frequently
associated with Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCPyV), which is suspected to be
oncogenic. In a series of MCC patients, we compared clinical, histopathologic,
and prognostic features according to the expression of viral large T antigen
(LTA) correlated with viral load. We evaluated the LTA expression by
immunohistochemistry using CM2B4 antibody and quantified viral load by real-time 
polymerase chain reaction. We analyzed formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
tissue samples (n = 36) and corresponding fresh-frozen biopsies when available (n
= 12), of the primary tumor and/or metastasis from 24 patients. MCPyV was
detected in 88% and 58% of MCC patients by real-time polymerase chain reaction
and immunohistochemistry, respectively. The relevance of viral load measurements 
was demonstrated by the strong consistency of viral load level between FFPE and
corresponding frozen tissues as well as between primary tumor and metastases.
From FFPE samples, 2 MCC subgroups were distinguished based on a viral load
threshold defined by the positivity of CM2B4 immunostaining. In the LTA-negative 
subgroup with no or low viral load (nonsignificant), tumor cells showed more
anisokaryosis (P = .01), and a solar elastosis around the tumor was more
frequently observed (P = .03). LTA-positive MCCs with significant viral load had 
a lower proliferation index (P = .03) and a longer survival of corresponding
patients (P = .008). Depending on MCPyV involvement, 2 MCC subgroups can be
distinguished on histopathologic criteria, and the CM2B4 antibody is able to
differentiate them reliably. Furthermore, the presence of a significant viral
load in tumors is predictive of better prognosis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.12.001 
PMID: 25623078  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
