

2950. Medicine (Baltimore). 2016 May;95(20):e3460. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000003460.

Primary Thyroid Extranasal NK/T-Cell Lymphoma Associated With Good Outcome: A
Case Report and Literature Review: A Care-Compliant Article.

Li JH(1), He HH, Cheng Y, He WJ.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Oncology (J-HL, H-HH, YC), First Affiliated Hospital of
Nanchang University, Nanchang; Department of Endocrinology (W-JH), First
Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

Most thyroid lymphomas are B-lineage, and T-cell lymphomas are rare. None of
primary thyroid extranasal NK/T-cell lymphoma (NKTCL) has been reported in the
literature. Here, we report a case of extranasal NKTCL exclusively arising in the
thyroid in an 18-year-old Chinese.The patient presented with rapid anterior
swelling at the neck and aggravated dyspnea for 2 months. Neck computer
tomography scan revealed diffuse thyroid enlargement in the left lobe compressing
the trachea. The thyroid function test was indicative of hypothyroidism.
Gastroscopy demonstrated chronic nonspecific gastritis. Subtotal thyroidectomy
was performed. Histological examination showed a diffuse infiltration of
neoplastic lymphoid cells with an angiodestructive behavior. Immunophenotype is
positive for CD2, CD56, CD43, and TIA-1, and typically negative for surface CD3. 
Epstein-Barr virus-encoded small RNAs were detected in tumor cells. A diagnose of
primary thyroid extranasal NKTCL-N lymphoma was confirmed by the findings.The
patient was treated with CHOP-L combination chemotherapy followed by local
radiotherapy, and tolerated the modality well. The patient has been in remission 
for 28 months so far.To our knowledge, this is the first case report of primary
extranasal NKTCL exclusively arising in the thyroid. The case has a relatively
good treatment outcome with timely diagnosis and multimodality approach.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000003460 
PMCID: PMC4902393
PMID: 27196451  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
