

2951. J Control Release. 2013 Dec 10;172(2):589-600. doi:
10.1016/j.jconrel.2013.04.010. Epub 2013 Apr 25.

Recent advances in delivery of drug-nucleic acid combinations for cancer
treatment.

Li J(1), Wang Y, Zhu Y, Oupický D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Center for Drug Delivery and
Nanomedicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-5830, USA.

Cancer treatment that uses a combination of approaches with the ability to affect
multiple disease pathways has been proven highly effective in the treatment of
many cancers. Combination therapy can include multiple chemotherapeutics or
combinations of chemotherapeutics with other treatment modalities like surgery or
radiation. However, despite the widespread clinical use of combination therapies,
relatively little attention has been given to the potential of modern nanocarrier
delivery methods, like liposomes, micelles, and nanoparticles, to enhance the
efficacy of combination treatments. This lack of knowledge is particularly
notable in the limited success of vectors for the delivery of combinations of
nucleic acids with traditional small molecule drugs. The delivery of drug-nucleic
acid combinations is particularly challenging due to differences in the
physicochemical properties of the two types of agents. This review discusses
recent advances in the development of delivery methods using combinations of
small molecule drugs and nucleic acid therapeutics to treat cancer. This review
primarily focuses on the rationale used for selecting appropriate drug-nucleic
acid combinations as well as progress in the development of nanocarriers suitable
for simultaneous delivery of drug-nucleic acid combinations.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2013.04.010 
PMCID: PMC3783568
PMID: 23624358  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
