

2952. Ann Hematol. 2010 Jan;89(1):67-74. doi: 10.1007/s00277-009-0759-x. Epub 2009 Jun 
2.

Increased bone resorption is implicated in the pathogenesis of bone loss in
hemophiliacs: correlations with hemophilic arthropathy and HIV infection.

Katsarou O(1), Terpos E, Chatzismalis P, Provelengios S, Adraktas T, Hadjidakis
D, Kouramba A, Karafoulidou A.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Blood Transfusion Center and Hemophilia Center, "Laiko" General Hospital, 
Athens, Greece.

Osteoporosis has been recently recognized as a severe comorbidity factor in
hemophilia. However, its pathogenesis is still obscure. We evaluated the
incidence of osteoporosis in 90 hemophilia patients and investigated possible
correlations with clinical and laboratory data. Out of the 90 patients, 80 (89%) 
had severe hemophilia, and 35 (38.9%) were human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV)-positive. Hemophilic arthropahty was assessed using World Federation of
Hemophilia clinical score and Petterson radiological score. Bone mineral density 
of the lumbar spine (LS) and femoral neck (FN) were measured using dual-energy
X-ray absortiometry. Bone turnover was evaluated by the measurement of: (1) bone 
resorption markers [N-terminal cross-linking telopeptide of collagen type I
(NTX), C-terminal cross-linking telopeptide of collagen type I (CTX), and
tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase isoform-5b (TRACP-5b)], (2) bone formation
markers [bone-alkaline phosphatase (bALP) and osteocalcin], and (3) osteoclast
stimulators (receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappaB ligand, osteoprotegerin,
and tumor necrosis factor-alpha). Osteopenia or osteoporosis was observed in 86% 
and 65% of the patients in FN and LS, respectively. Osteoporosis was more common 
among HIV-positive patients in both FN (65.3% vs 41.6%; p = 0.007) and LS (17.86%
vs 5.41%, p = 0.004). The severity of osteoporosis in FN correlated with the
patients' total clinical and radiological score (p = 0.001). Hemophilia patients 
showed increased osteoclastic activity (significant increase of TRACP-5b, NTX,
and CTX), which was not accompanied by a comparable increased bone formation
(reduced osteocalcin and borderline increase of bALP). In multivariate analysis, 
HIV infection (p = 0.05) and total clinical score (p = 0.001) were independent
risk factors for osteoporosis development. We conclude that there is a high
prevalence of osteoporosis among hemophiliacs, which is related to the severity
of arthropathy and is enhanced by HIV infection. We report for the first time a
high bone resorption that seems not to be balanced by a comparable bone
formation.

DOI: 10.1007/s00277-009-0759-x 
PMID: 19488753  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
