

2967. Kansenshogaku Zasshi. 2012 Nov;86(6):768-72.

[A case of descending necrotizing mediastinitis caused by infection with
Streptococcus agalactiae in a patient with diabetes mellitus].

[Article in Japanese]

Yoshii Y(1), Shimizu K, Watanabe S, Takagi M, Kuwano K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Jikei University Kashiwa Hospital.

We report a case with an atypical presentation of descending necrotizing
mediastinitis (DNM). A 47-year-old woman with a medical history of untreated type
2 diabetes mellitus and influenza type A virus infection 2 weeks prior to
admission was referred to our hospital complaining of right cervical pain and
right upper limb swelling. A chest enhanced computed tomographic (CT) scan showed
a ring-enhanced mass-like shadow extending from the right sternomastoid muscle
down to the right upper mediastinum, compressing the right subclavicular vein. We
diagnosed the patient as having DNM based on a physical examination and the CT
findings. Because the abscess extended from deep in the neck to the upper
mediastinum and right upper pleural space, emergent abscess debridement and
drainage was required. After hospitalization, antibiotics (Ampicillin/Sulbactam
12 g/day) were also administered based on Gram-stain findings from the drainage
fluid, which showed Gram-positive cocci resembling a string of beads. A culture
of the drainage fluid identified Streptococcus agalactiae. Aggressive abscess
drainage and early antibiotic therapy resulted in a favorable response. She was
discharged without complications on the 33rd hospital day. DNM is well known as a
rare but lethal disease. In this case, the presence of diabetes mellitus and
post-influenza infection might have been risk factors for a serious S. agalactiae
infection. Early aggressive therapy and adequate drainage are recommended for
patients with DNM.


PMID: 23367853  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
