

2969. Oncol Rep. 2016 Jan;35(1):99-106. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4340. Epub 2015 Oct 20.

Effects of HPV-16 infection on hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma and FaDu
cells.

Lu W(1), Feng L(2), Li P(3), Wang Y(4), Du Y(4), Chen X(4), Wu S(3), Zhao G(4),
Lou W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, The First Affiliated
Hospital, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan 450052, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Pathogenic Organism Biology, Henan University of TCM, Zhengzhou,
Henan 450008, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, Henan 450052, P.R. China.
(4)College of Basic Medical Sciences, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan
450001, P.R. China.

Hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma is a common type of malignant tumor among 
head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs). Heavy smoking and/or drinking is
associated with the development of HNSCC. However, HNSCC also occurs in
individuals that do not drink or smoke, possibly due to infection with the human 
papilloma virus (HPV). HPV-16 has been shown to be closely associated with the
occurrence of several types of cancers. However, its role in hypopharyngeal
squamous cell carcinoma remains unclear. In the present study, we investigated
the effects of HPV-16 on hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma and FaDu cells.
Lentiviral vectors were used to establish FaDu cells that expressed the E6 and E7
proteins of HPV-16. We used quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (qRT-PCR) assays and western blotting to detect and determine the levels
of expression for E6-E7 mRNAs and proteins. Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) assays,
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA), Transwell assays, and flow cytometry 
were used to assess the effects of HPV-16 E6-E7 on the proliferation, invasion,
metastasis and apoptosis of FaDu cells. Expression of microRNAs was analyzed by
qRT-PCR. We found that the expression levels of HPV-16 E6-E7 were increased in
FaDu cells transfected with the lentiviral vector compared with that observed in 
the control cells. In addition, the rates of apoptosis were decreased in the
transfected cells, while proliferation was increased. The average numbers of
cells penetrating the Matrigel were significantly higher than those for the
controls. We detected miR-363 and miR-15a, and their expression levels were
significantly increased in the HPV-16-positive patients and in FaDu cells
expressing HPV-16 E6-E7. We found that HPV-16 E6-E7 appeared to inhibit
apoptosis, and to increase cell proliferation, invasion and metastasis.
Furthermore, miR-363 and miR-15a were overexpressed in the hypopharyngeal
squamous cell carcinoma samples infected with HPV-16, and in FaDu cells stably
expressing HPV-16 E6-E7. These findings may provide a new clue of the mechanisms 
involved in the pathogenesis of HPV-16-positive hypopharyngeal squamous cell
carcinoma.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2015.4340 
PMID: 26497405  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
