

2970. Hematol Oncol. 2017 Jun;35(2):158-162. doi: 10.1002/hon.2273. Epub 2015 Nov 13.

Novel treatment for early-stage nasal natural killer/T-cell lymphoma:
intra-maxillary arterial infusion chemotherapy with concomitant radiotherapy.

Takahara M(1), Nagato T(1), Kishibe K(1), Ueda S(1), Komabayashi Y(1), Yamashina 
M(2), Takahashi K(2), Harabuchi Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Asahikawa Medical
University, Asahikawa, 078-8510, Japan.
(2)Department of Radiology, Asahikawa Medical University, Asahikawa, 078-8510,
Japan.

Nasal natural killer (NK)/T-cell lymphoma (NNKTL) displays unusual
clinicopathological features, and the prognosis is very poor, even in the early
stages of the disease. For early stage NNKTL, we have developed a novel
chemoradiotherapy regimen incorporating arterial infusion chemotherapy,
administered via the superficial temporal artery, in combination with
radiotherapy. The novel arterial infusion regimen consists of ifosfamide,
carboplatin, methotrexate, peplomycin, and etoposide (MPVIC-P). From 2003 to
2011, 12 patients with early stage NNKTL were treated with the MPVIC-P regimen
via arterial infusion with concomitant radiotherapy (54 Gy). We have previously
reported on the presence of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) genetic DNA in NNKTL.
Therefore, the effect of the treatment was evaluated by using both clinical
findings and serum EBV DNA copy number. The observation period ranged from
39 months to 111 months post-treatment (median: 81 months). All 12 patients
achieved and maintained complete remission and, to date, show no sign of relapse.
Serum EBV DNA copy numbers decreased to below detectable levels in all 12
patients tested. Manageable mucositis was the most common grade 3-4 toxicity, and
it was seen in 10 (83%) patients. However, grade 3-4 hematological toxicity was
only seen in 4 (33%) patients. We conclude that our regimen of intra-maxillary
arterial chemotherapy with concomitant radiotherapy is an effective treatment
with minimal toxicity for early stage NNKTL. Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, 
Ltd.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/hon.2273 
PMID: 26563973  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
