

2971. Trends Biochem Sci. 2017 Jan;42(1):42-56. doi: 10.1016/j.tibs.2016.08.016. Epub
2016 Sep 23.

Cellular Functions and Molecular Mechanisms of the ESCRT Membrane-Scission
Machinery.

Christ L(1), Raiborg C(1), Wenzel EM(1), Campsteijn C(2), Stenmark H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Biomedicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo,
Montebello, 0379 Oslo, Norway; Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute
for Cancer Research, Oslo University Hospital, Montebello, 0379 Oslo, Norway.
(2)Centre for Cancer Biomedicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo,
Montebello, 0379 Oslo, Norway; Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute
for Cancer Research, Oslo University Hospital, Montebello, 0379 Oslo, Norway.
Electronic address: coen.campsteijn@rr-research.no.
(3)Centre for Cancer Biomedicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo,
Montebello, 0379 Oslo, Norway; Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute
for Cancer Research, Oslo University Hospital, Montebello, 0379 Oslo, Norway;
Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology, Faculty of Medicine, 7491 Trondheim, Norway. Electronic address:
stenmark@ulrik.uio.no.

The endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) machinery is an
assembly of protein subcomplexes (ESCRT I-III) that cooperate with the ATPase
VPS4 to mediate scission of membrane necks from the inside. The ESCRT machinery
has evolved as a multipurpose toolbox for mediating receptor sorting, membrane
remodeling, and membrane scission, with ESCRT-III as the major
membrane-remodeling component. Cellular membrane scission processes mediated by
ESCRT-III include biogenesis of multivesicular endosomes, budding of enveloped
viruses, cytokinetic abscission, neuron pruning, plasma membrane wound repair,
nuclear pore quality control, nuclear envelope reformation, and nuclear envelope 
repair. We describe here the involvement of the ESCRT machinery in these
processes and review current models for how ESCRT-III-containing multimeric
filaments serve to mediate membrane remodeling and scission.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tibs.2016.08.016 
PMID: 27669649  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
