

2978. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012 Mar;11(3):594-603. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-11-0725. Epub
2011 Dec 14.

A human Fab-based immunoconjugate specific for the LMP1 extracellular domain
inhibits nasopharyngeal carcinoma growth in vitro and in vivo.

Chen R(1), Zhang D, Mao Y, Zhu J, Ming H, Wen J, Ma J, Cao Q, Lin H, Tang Q,
Liang J, Feng Z.

Author information: 
(1)Nanjing Medical University, The Key Laboratory of Cancer Biomarkers,
Prevention & Treatment Cancer Center, The Key Laboratory of Antibody Technique of
Ministry of Health and The Second Affiliated Hospital, Department of
Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, 140 Hanzhong Road, Nanjing 210029, China.

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a major cause of cancer-related death in
Southeast Asia and China. Metastasis and relapse are the primary cause of
morbidity and mortality in NPC. Recent evidence suggests that the Epstein-Barr
virus latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) is exclusively expressed in most NPC and
is a potential target for biotherapy. In this study, we successfully prepared a
novel human antibody Fab (HLEAFab) against LMP1 extracellular domain, which was
subsequently conjugated with mitomycin C (MMC), thus forming an immunoconjugate
(HLEAFab-MMC). The effects of HLEAFab-MMC on proliferation and apoptosis in NPC
cell lines HNE2/LMP1 and the inhibition rate of growth of NPC xenografts in nude 
mice were examined. The inhibition rate of HNE2/LMP1 cell proliferation was the
highest for HLEAFab-MMC (76%) compared with MMC (31%) and HLEAFab (22%) at a
concentration of 200 nmol/L and showed dose-dependent fashion. The apoptosis rate
of HNE2/LMP1 cell lines was 13.88% in HLEAFab-MMC group, 3.04% in MMC group,
2.78% in HLEAFab group, and 2.10% in negative control group at the same
concentration, respectively. In vivo, the inhibition rate of growth of NPC
xenografts in nude mice was 55.1% in HLEAFab-MMC group, 26.5% in MMC group, and
5.64% in HLEAFab group. In summary, our findings show that HLEAFab-MMC is a
unique immunoconjugate with the potential as a novel therapeutic agent in the
treatment of LMP1-expressing NPC.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-11-0725 
PMID: 22169768  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
