

2979. Ideggyogy Sz. 2018 Mar 30;71(3-04):137-139. doi: 10.18071/isz.71.0137.

A case with angiographic demonstration of isolated anterior spinal artery
occlusion.

Dogan VB (1), Kara B (2), Selcuk HH (2), Dirican AC (1), Koksal A (1).

Author information: 
(1)Bakirkoy Training and Research Hospital for Psychiatry and Neurological
Disorders, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Bakirkoy Dr. Sadi Konuk Bakirkoy Research and Training Hospital, Istanbul,
Turkey.

Anterior spinal artery syndrome (ASAS) is a rare syndrome which occurs due to
thrombosis of anterior spinal artery (ASA) which supplies anterior two thirds of 
the spinal cord. A 27-year-old female patient was admitted to emergency clinic
with sudden onset neck pain, sensory loss and weakness in proximal upper
extremities which occurred at rest. Thrombophilia assessment tests were negative.
Echocardiography was normal. Serum viral markers were negative. In cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) examination, cell count and biochemistry was normal, oligoclonal band
was negative, viral markers for herpes simplex virus (HSV) type-1 and type-2,
Brucella, Borrellia, Treponema pallidum, Tuberculosis were negative. Diffusion
restriction which reveals acute ischemia was detected in Diffusion weighted MRI. 
Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was performed. Medical treatment was
300mg/day acetilsalycilic acid. Patient was discharged from neurology clinics to 
receive rehabilitation against spasticity.

Publisher: Az arteria spinalis anterior szindróma (ASAS) a gerincvelő elülső
kétharmadát ellátó arteria spinalis anterior (ASA) thrombosisa miatt bekövetkező 
ritka tünetegyüttes. A 27 éves nőbeteg hirtelen kezdetű nyaki fájdalom, a felső
végtagok proximális részén nyugalmi állapotban tapasztalt gyengeség és
érzésvesztés miatt jelentkezett a sürgősségi osztályon. A thrombophilia
kimutatását célzó teszt és a szérum vírusmarker-vizsgálata negatív, az
echokardiográfia, valamint a cerebrospinalis folyadék (CSF) sejtszám- és
biokémia-vizsgálata normáleredménnyel zárult. Az oligoclonalis csíkok, az 1-es és
2-es típusú herpes simplex vírus (HSV) vírusmarkerei, a Brucella-, Borrellia-,
Treponema pallidum- és tuberculosistesztek negatív eredményt adtak. A
diffúziósúlyozott MR-képalkotás akut ischaemiára utaló diffú-ziócsökkenést
mutatott. Digitális szubsztrakciós angiográfia (DSA) készült. A beteg 300 mg/nap 
acetilszalicilsav-kezelésben, és a neurológiai klinikai ellátás után spaszticitás
elleni rehabilitációs terápiában részesült.
DOI: 10.18071/isz.71.0137 
PMID: 29889472  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
