

298. Chem Res Toxicol. 2014 Apr 21;27(4):462-9. doi: 10.1021/tx500034c. Epub 2014 Apr 
2.

Prevalence of human papillomavirus in oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma in
the United States across time.

Stein AP(1), Saha S, Yu M, Kimple RJ, Lambert PF.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of †Oncology, ‡Human Oncology, and §Biostatistics, University of
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health , Madison, Wisconsin 53706, United
States.

Human papillomaviruses (HPVs) are involved in approximately 5% of all human
cancer. Although initially recognized for causing nearly all cases of cervical
carcinoma, much data has now emerged implicating HPVs as a causal factor in other
anogenital cancers as well as a subset of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas 
(HNSCCs), most commonly oropharyngeal cancers. Numerous clinical trials have
demonstrated that patients with HPV+ oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma
(OPSCC) have improved survival compared to patients with HPV- cancers.
Furthermore, epidemiological evidence shows the incidence of OPSCC has been
steadily rising over time in the United States. It has been proposed that an
increase in HPV-related OPSCCs is the driving force behind the increasing rate of
OPSCC. Although some studies have revealed an increase in HPV+ head and neck
malignancies over time in specific regions of the United States, there has not
been a comprehensive study validating this trend across the entire country.
Therefore, we undertook this meta-analysis to assess all literature through
August 2013 that reported on the prevalence of HPV in OPSCC for patient
populations within the United States. The results show an increase in the
prevalence of HPV+ OPSCC from 20.9% in the pre-1990 time period to 51.4% in
1990-1999 and finally to 65.4% for 2000-present. In this manner, our study
provides further evidence to support the hypothesis that HPV-associated OPSCCs
are driving the increasing incidence of OPSCC over time in the United States.

DOI: 10.1021/tx500034c 
PMCID: PMC4002059
PMID: 24641254  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
