

2980. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e41853. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041853. Epub 2012 Jul 27.

Association between single nucleotide polymorphisms in ERCC4 and risk of squamous
cell carcinoma of the head and neck.

Yu H(1), Liu Z, Huang YJ, Yin M, Wang LE, Wei Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Guiling Medical University
School of Public Health, Guilin, China. yuhongping@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Excision repair cross-complementation group 4 gene (ERCC4/XPF) plays 
an important role in nucleotide excision repair and participates in removal of
DNA interstrand cross-links and DNA double-strand breaks. Single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in ERCC4 may impact repair capacity and affect cancer
susceptibility.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this case-control study, we evaluated
associations of four selected potentially functional SNPs in ERCC4 with risk of
squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN) in 1,040 non-Hispanic white 
patients with SCCHN and 1,046 cancer-free matched controls. We found that the
variant GG genotype of rs2276466 was significantly associated with a decreased
risk of SCCHN (OR = 0.69, 95% CI 0.50-0.96), and that the variant TT genotype of 
rs3136038 showed a borderline significant decreased risk with SCCHN (OR = 0.76,
95% CI: 0.58-1.01) in the recessive model. Such protective effects were more
evident in oropharyngeal cancer (OR = 0.61, 95% CI: 0.40-0.92 for rs2276466;
OR = 0.69, 95% CI: 0.48-0.98 for rs3136038). No significant associations were
found for the other two SNPs (rs1800067 and rs1799798). In addition, individuals 
with the rs2276466 GG or with the rs3136038 TT genotypes had higher levels of
ERCC4 mRNA expression than those with the corresponding wild-type genotypes in 90
Epstein-Barr virus-transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines derived from Caucasians.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that these two SNPs (rs2276466 and rs3136038) 
in ERCC4 may be functional and contribute to SCCHN susceptibility. However, our
findings need to be replicated in further large epidemiological and functional
studies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041853 
PMCID: PMC3407112
PMID: 22848636  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
