

2982. South Med J. 2016 Aug;109(8):481-6. doi: 10.14423/SMJ.0000000000000503.

Clinical Features of Respiratory Viral Infections Among Inpatients at a Major US 
Tertiary Care Hospital.

Malhotra P(1), Luka A(1), McWilliams CS(1), Poeth KG(1), Schwartz R(1), Elfekey
M(1), Balwan S(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Infectious Diseases, the Department of Occupational
Medicine, Epidemiology, and Prevention, and the Department of Internal Medicine, 
North Shore Long Island Jewish Hofstra School of Medicine, Manhasset and Great
Neck, New York, War Memorial Hospital, Sault Sainte Marie, Michigan, New York
University Lutheran Medical Center, Brooklyn, and Mercy Hospital, St Louis,
Missouri.

OBJECTIVES: Respiratory viral illnesses (RVI) are reliably diagnosed by
respiratory viral panel using polymerase chain reaction (RVP-PCR); however, owing
to the scant data, clinical presentation alone is unreliable in establishing
viral etiology. The primary objective of this study was to characterize signs and
symptoms of RVI among inpatients in a major tertiary care hospital.
METHODS: Between 2013 and 2015, adult inpatients with RVI undergoing RVP-PCR were
prospectively enrolled in our study. Clinical data were collected by interviews
and electronic medical record reviews. Data analysis was performed using Ï‡(2)
testing, analysis of variance for continuous variables, and logistic regression
modeling.
RESULTS: Of 421 patients analyzed, 175 (41.7%) had a positive RVP-PCR. Patients
were evenly matched at baseline except for renal disease. Multivariate logistic
regression modeling demonstrated the following positive correlations: positive
RVP-PCR with renal disease (odds ratio [OR] 2.08), cough (OR 2.28), and wheezing 
(OR 1.8); influenza with cough (OR 5.04), and renal disease (OR 2.17);
metapneumovirus with age older than 65 (OR 3.24); respiratory syncytial viruses
with wheezing (OR 3.42) and immunosuppression (OR 3.11); and parainfluenza with
smoking (OR 3.16). Negative correlations included influenza with anosmia (OR
0.41); rhinovirus/enterovirus with feeling confined to bed (OR 0.3);
metapneumovirus with smoking (OR 0.29); and parainfluenza with male sex (OR
0.22).
CONCLUSIONS: In this descriptive study, we noted specific viral associations with
clinical signs and symptoms among 421 inpatients with RVIs. With increasing
RVP-PCR use, studies similar to ours may be able to better define the clinical
presentation of RVIs and lead to evidence-based, clinical presentation-guided
diagnostic and management algorithms.

DOI: 10.14423/SMJ.0000000000000503 
PMID: 27490659  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
