

2984. Int J Drug Policy. 2017 Aug;46:28-33. doi: 10.1016/j.drugpo.2017.05.005. Epub
2017 Jun 3.

Injection into the jugular vein among people who inject drugs in the United
Kingdom: Prevalence, associated factors and harms.

Hope VD(1), Iversen J(2), Cullen KJ(3), Parry JV(3), Maher L(2), Nucbe F(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Infection Service, Public Health England, London, UK; Public Health
Institute, Liverpool John Moores University, UK. Electronic address:
v.d.hope@ljmu.ac.uk.
(2)Kirby Institute, UNSW, Sydney, Australia.
(3)National Infection Service, Public Health England, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: While people who inject drugs (PWID) typically use peripheral veins, 
some inject into their central veins, including the femoral and jugular veins.
Injection into the jugular vein can have serious adverse health consequences,
including jugular vein thrombosis, deep neck infections, pneumothorax,
endocarditis and sepsis. This study examined the prevalence of, and factors
associated with, jugular vein injection among a large sample of PWID in the
United Kingdom.
METHOD: Unlinked anonymous surveys (2011-14) recruited PWID from agencies
providing services to this population. Self-reported demographic and
injection-related data were collected from consenting respondents using a brief
questionnaire and dried blood spot samples were tested for exposure to HIV,
hepatitis C virus (HCV) and hepatitis B virus (HBV). Univariate and multivariable
logistic regression were used to examine factors associated with jugular vein
injection.
RESULTS: Among 5261 PWID, one third had injected into a central vein in the
previous 28 days, including 6% (n=339) who had injected into their jugular vein
and 1% (n=52) who had used this site exclusively for recent injections. Factors
independently associated with recent jugular vein injection in multivariable
analysis included female gender, a lifetime history of imprisonment, sharing
needles and syringes, poly-drug injection and injection into multiple body sites.
Jugular vein injection was also associated with experiencing injection-related
injuries, although no associations were identified with respect to exposure to
blood borne viral infections.
CONCLUSION: A significant minority of PWID inject into the jugular vein in the
United Kingdom. Public health responses should investigate ways to support and
promote good injection site management in order to minimise vascular damage and
reduce problems with peripheral venous access. Women who inject drugs, PWID with 
a history of imprisonment and those people who are experiencing early signs of
injection-related skin and soft tissue injuries are priority sub-populations for 
interventions.

Crown Copyright Â© 2017. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.drugpo.2017.05.005 
PMID: 28586700  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
