

2994. Am J Surg Pathol. 2011 Aug;35(8):1168-76. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31821e1f54.

Cribriform adenocarcinoma of minor salivary gland origin principally affecting
the tongue: characterization of new entity.

Skalova A(1), Sima R, Kaspirkova-Nemcova J, Simpson RH, Elmberger G, Leivo I, Di 
Palma S, Jirasek T, Gnepp DR, Weinreb I, Perez-Ordo√±ez B, Mukensnabl P, Rychly B,
Hrabal P, Michal M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Charles University Prague, Faculty of Medicine in
Pilsen, Pilsen, Czech Republic. skalova@fnplzen.cz

We present a series of 23 cases of a distinctive, hitherto poorly recognized
low-grade adenocarcinoma, with several histologic features reminiscent of
papillary carcinoma of the thyroid, and which mostly but not exclusively occurs
in the tongue. All the tumors were unencapsulated and were divided into lobules
that were composed mainly of cribriform and solid growth patterns. Therefore, we 
propose the name "cribriform adenocarcinoma of minor salivary gland origin
(CAMSG)." All the patients were adults with a mean age at diagnosis of 55.8 years
(range, 25 to 85 y). Fourteen of the 23 tumors were localized in the tongue, 3 in
the soft palate, 2 in the retromolar buccal mucosa, 3 in the lingual tonsils, and
1 in the upper lip. Fifteen patients of 23 had synchronous metastases in the
cervical lymph nodes at the time of diagnosis, bilateral in 3 cases. In 3
patients, the nodal metastasis was the first evidence of disease, later
investigation revealing primary neoplasms in the base of tongue and tonsil,
respectively. In addition, 1 patient developed a cervical lymph node metastasis 8
years after excision of a primary tumor of the tongue. Data on treatment and
follow-up were available in 14 cases. The patients were treated by radical
excision with clear margins (12 cases) or by simple excision (2 cases). Neck
dissection was performed in 10 patients; 9 received radiotherapy, but none were
treated by chemotherapy. Clinical follow-up ranged from 2 months to 13 years
(mean, 6 y and 5 mo). Twelve patients are alive with no evidence of recurrent or 
metastatic disease after treatment, 1 patient died 2 years after surgery without 
evidence of tumor, and 1 patient is alive with recurrent tumor of the palate.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31821e1f54 
PMID: 21716087  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
