

3. Med Microbiol Immunol. 2017 Jun;206(3):267-276. doi: 10.1007/s00430-017-0502-5.
Epub 2017 Mar 25.

Human papilloma virus (HPV) infection leads to the development of head and neck
lesions but offers better prognosis in malignant Indian patients.

Sarkar S(1), Alam N(2), Chakraborty J(2), Biswas J(2), Mandal SS(3), Roychoudhury
S(4), Panda CK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncogene Regulation, Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute, 37,
S.P. Mukherjee Road, Kolkata, 700026, India.
(2)Department of Surgical Oncology, Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute,
Kolkata, India.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Chittaranjan National Cancer
Institute, Kolkata, India.
(4)Basic Research, Saroj Gupta Cancer Centre and Research Institute, Kolkata,
India.
(5)Department of Oncogene Regulation, Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute, 37,
S.P. Mukherjee Road, Kolkata, 700026, India. ckpanda.cnci@gmail.com.

Head and neck cancers constitute a multifactorial global disease burden and are
associated with human papilloma virus (HPV) as a possible risk factor. The aim of
the study is to understand the relationship between HPV and the development of
head and neck lesions in Indian patients. To this end, frequency of HPV was
assessed in relation to different demographic and etiological features and
correlated with patient survival. The prevalence of HPV significantly increased
from mild dysplastic lesions (43.6%) to head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) stage IV (68.5%) with HPV 16 being pre-dominant in both dysplasia (43.8%)
and HNSCC (61.5%). Similar trend was observed in increasing grades of the tumour.
In invasive lesions, patients aged below the median age of onset showed
significantly higher occurrence of HPV than those above it. Patients harbouring
HPV showed a significantly better survival irrespective of age of onset.
Likewise, better survival was observed in tobacco habit negative/HPV-positive
patients, and as reflected in both univariate and multivariate analysis. Majority
of the HPV 16-positive samples showed moderate/high nuclear expression of HPV E6 
and E7 proteins in tumours and respective basal layer of adjacent normal tissues.
Thus, our data indicate that frequent HPV infection, along with tobacco habit, is
a pre-requisite factor for the development of HNSCC of Indian patients but offers
a better survival even during tobacco usage, implicating its diagnostic and
prognostic importance.

DOI: 10.1007/s00430-017-0502-5 
PMID: 28343330  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
