

3002. Auris Nasus Larynx. 2011 Apr;38(2):244-9. doi: 10.1016/j.anl.2010.07.006.

Epidemiological analysis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma in the central region of
Japan during the period from 1996 to 2005.

Kimura Y(1), Suzuki D, Tokunaga T, Takabayashi T, Yamada T, Wakisaka N, Yoshizaki
T, Murata H, Miwa K, Shoujaku H, Watanabe Y, Yamada N, Ito Y, Yuta A, Takeuchi K,
Hosokawa S, Mineta H, Hasegawa Y, Fujimoto Y, Nakashima T, Fujieda S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University of Fukui,
Japan.

OBJECTIVE: It has become clear through epidemiological analysis that the
incidence of cancers of the lung, liver, colon, and rectum are increasing in
Japan every year. However, there have been few epidemiological analyses of
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) in Japan. The aim of this study was to analyze the
epidemiology and current incidence of NPC in the Chubu region of Japan during the
period from 1996 to 2005.
METHODS: Takeshita et al. conducted a similar investigation in the Chubu region
10 years ago, and, as a result, this is a comparative study. The Chubu region is 
the central region of Japanese main island. We researched NPC patients treated in
hospitals in each prefecture over a 10-year period (1996-2005) using a
questionnaire.
RESULTS: A total of 525 cases (male:385, female:134, unknown:6) were analyzed
epidemiologically, histologically, serologically, and clinically in this study.
The incidence per 10(5) population per year was 0.29. For the period of
1986-1995, the age-standardized incidence of NPC was 0.28 per 10(5) persons per
year in Takeshita's report. There was no significant difference between the two
periods. The ages of the patients ranged from 13 to 90 years. The mean age of was
55.2 years. On the basis of the World Health Organization (WHO) histological
criteria, 36% of the patients were classified as WHO I, 27% as WHO II, and 37% as
WHO III. Carcinoma was located in the posterosuperior region in 56%, lateral in
41%, and inferior in 3%. Tumor staging showed that 6% to belonged to stage I, 25%
to stage II, 31% to stage III, and 38% to stage IV. A neck mass was present in
52% of the patients, ear symptoms in 48%, nasal symptoms in 27%, headaches in
10%, pharyngeal symptoms in 9%, ophthalmologic symptoms in 9%, and cranial
neurological symptoms in 9%. The positive rates of serum titers of the antibodies
to Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-related antigens were calculated. The positive rate
of anti-EBV-viral capsid antigen (VCA) immunoglobulin (Ig) G titers was 58.6%,
that of anti-EBV-VCA IgA titers was 53.6%, and that of EBNA was 81%. The
five-year survival rate for all patients was 67.6%, and that for those in stage
I, II, III, and IV was 75%, 84%, 69%, and 53%, respectively. The five-year
survival rate for stage IV was significantly lower than those for the other
stages (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: The age-standardized annual incidence of NPC in our survey was 0.29
per 10(5) persons per year, being relatively low and stable.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anl.2010.07.006 
PMID: 20817430  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
