

3004. Mol Med Rep. 2017 Nov;16(5):6570-6579. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2017.7437. Epub 2017 Sep 
7.

Profiling of differentially expressed genes in adipose tissues of multiple
symmetric lipomatosis.

Chen K(1), Wang L(1), Yang W(1), Wang C(2), Hu G(2), Mo Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, The Third Xiangya Hospital of Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan 410013, P.R. China.
(2)Department of General Surgery, The Third Xiangya Hospital of Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan 410013, P.R. China.

Multiple symmetric lipomatosis (MSL) is a rare disorder characterized by aberrant
multiple and symmetric subcutaneous adipose tissue accumulation in the face,
neck, shoulders, back, chest and abdomen, severely affecting the quality of life 
of patients. At present, precise MSL etiology and pathogenesis remain to be
elucidated. The present study first utilized a digital gene expression technique 
with a next‑generation sequencing platform to profile differentially expressed
genes in three cases of MSL vs. normal control tissue. cDNA libraries from these 
tissue specimens were constructed and DNA sequenced for identification of
differentially expressed genes, which underwent bioinformatic analysis using the 
Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) and
protein‑protein interaction (PPI) network analyses. As a result, a total of 859
differentially expressed genes were identified, including 308 upregulated genes
(C19orf80, Apelin, C21orf33, FAM166B and HSD11B2 were mostly upregulated 6.984‑, 
4.670‑, 4.412‑, 3.693‑ and 3.561‑fold, respectively) and 551 downregulated genes 
[FosB proto‑oncogene, AP‑1 transcription factor subunit (FOSB), selectin (SEL) E,
RAR related orphan receptor (ROR) B, salt inducible kinase (SIK)1 and epidermal
growth factor‑like protein (EGFL)6 were mostly downregulated ‑9.845, ‑8.243,
‑8.123, ‑7.702 and ‑7.664 fold, respectively). The GO functional enrichment
analysis demonstrated these differentially expressed genes were predominantly
involved in biological processes and cellular components, while the KEGG pathway 
enrichment analysis demonstrated that ribosome, non‑alcoholic fatty liver
disease, human T‑lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV‑I) infection and Alzheimer's
disease pathways were altered in MSL. The PPI network data demonstrated ubiquitin
C (UBC), translocator protein (TSPO), Jun Proto‑Oncogene, AP‑1 Transcription
Factor (JUN) and FOS were among these differentially expressed genes that
participated in regulation of adipocyte differentiation, although no previous
study has linked them to MSL. In conclusion, the present study profiled
differentially expressed genes in MSL and identified gene pathways that may be
associated with MSL development and progression.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2017.7437 
PMCID: PMC5865826
PMID: 28901441  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
