

3005. Arch Osteoporos. 2014;9:181. doi: 10.1007/s11657-014-0181-4. Epub 2014 May 14.

Comparison of peripheral forearm DXA and clinical risk factor screening using
FRAX® to assess the risk of HIV-associated low bone mass: a cross-sectional
study.

Short CE(1), Shaw SG, Fisher MJ, Gilleece YC, Walker-Bone K.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Infectious Diseases, Imperial College London, Wright-Fleming
Institute, St Mary's Hospital Campus, Norfolk Place, London, W2 1PG, UK.

There is growing awareness that HIV infection is associated with low bone mass
and fracture. DXA is a relatively scarce resource. Therefore, we evaluated two
tools: peripheral DXA (pDXA) at the forearm and Fracture Risk Assessment Tool
(FRAX®) to see which performed best at identifying men who should undergo DXA. In
this setting, neither pDXA nor FRAX® showed good sensitivity and specificity for 
DXA.PURPOSE: Infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is associated with
an increased risk of low bone mineral density (BMD) and fractures. European
guidance advocates screening using the FRAX® tool at diagnosis, on initiation of 
antiretroviral therapy and biannually thereafter in order to decide the need for 
DXA scanning. This cross-sectional study evaluates the performance of FRAX® and
compares its sensitivity and specificity with that of another screening tool,
peripheral forearm DXA (pDXA).
METHODS: HIV-infected men with varying exposure to antiretroviral therapies were 
recruited. FRAX® scores were calculated for all participants and everybody
underwent pDXA scanning. Femoral neck and lumbar spine BMD was acquired on a
Hologic QDR machine by an assessor blinded to the results of the FRAX® and pDXA.
RESULTS: One hundred and sixty-eight men (median age 45 years) were recruited
with a median duration since HIV diagnosis of 74 months. In total, 21 % of
subjects had either osteoporosis (aged ≥50 years) or BMD lower than expected for 
age (aged <50 years), according to axial DXA. Using a pDXA screening threshold of
T ≤ -0.9, sensitivity was high (91 %) in defining those with the worst BMD on
axial DXA but with poorer specificity (33 %). Alternately, using a threshold of
T ≤ -2.7 reduced sensitivity (34 %) with an increase in specificity (91 %). FRAX®
with HIV included as a secondary risk factor had poor sensitivity (31 %) and
specificity (74 %) for detecting those with the poorest BMD on axial DXA.
CONCLUSION: In this setting, neither pDXA scanning nor FRAX® was sensitive and
specific for low bone mass on DXA and neither was performance much improved by
using both screening tools. Prospective studies with fracture as an outcome are
required in HIV.

DOI: 10.1007/s11657-014-0181-4 
PMCID: PMC4766729
PMID: 24847675  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
