

3008. Transplant Proc. 2010 Apr;42(3):843-5. doi: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2010.02.038.

Living donor liver transplantation for acute hepatic failure caused by
reactivation of hepatitis B virus infection after chemotherapy for hematologic
malignancy: case reports.

Kim SG(1), Chun JM, Jin R, Kim JY, Won DI, Hwang YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Hepato-Biliary Pancreas and Liver
Transplantation, Kyungpook National University Hospital, School of Medicine,
Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Republic of Korea.

Cancer chemotherapy in chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) carriers occasionally
leads to acute hepatic failure (AHF) from viral reactivation resulting in an high
mortality rate. In this situation, living donor liver transplantation (LDLT) can 
be life saving. Herein we have reported 2 cases of successful LDLT performed for 
AHF caused by reactivation of HBV infection during chemotherapy for hematologic
malignancies. In case 1, a 38-year-old male HBV carrier with a neck mass was
hisopathologically diagnosed as Hodgkin's lymphoma. During 4 cycles of
chemotherapy he developed right upper quadrant pain and jaundice. Laboratory data
(alanine amino transferase, 701 U/L, total bilirubin: 7.92 mg/dL, positive
hepatitis B e antigen showed that he had experienced an acute exacerbation of
chronic hepatitis. Soon, he developed grade IV hepatic encephalopathy with a
total bilirubin level of 50.56 mg/dL and a model for End-Stage Liver Disease
score of 40. After LDLT, he has been free of relapse for 52 months so far. In
case 2, a 49-year-old male HBV carrier was diagnosed in the chronic phase of
chronic myeloid leukemia. The patient had been under Imatinib treatment for 1
year until he was admitted for AHF. He developed grade II encephalopathy with a
total bilirubin of 50.8 mg/dL. We performed LDLT; the patient has been free of
relapse for 17 months. LDLT was a life-saving procedure for AHF caused by
reactivation of HBV during chemotherapy for hematologic malignancy. It can
provide long-term survival if the coexistent hematologic malignancy has been
controlled.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2010.02.038 
PMID: 20430187  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
