

3009. Am J Otolaryngol. 2009 Sep-Oct;30(5):300-4. doi: 10.1016/j.amjoto.2008.06.014.
Epub 2008 Oct 11.

Preirradiation sinus mucosal disease in patients with nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Huang CC(1), Chang PH, Lee TJ, Chuang CC, Chang JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery, Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital, Kwei-Shan, Taoyuan, 333, Taiwan.

PURPOSE: The objective of this study was to evaluate the incidence and the
possible risk factors for preirradiation abnormalities of the sinus mucosa in
patients with nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) by magnetic resonance imaging.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Medical records and magnetic resonance imaging results
were reviewed and compared between a group of patients with NPC and a control
group. The Lund-Mackay system for staging of rhinosinusitis (Lund score) was used
as a tool for the investigation.
RESULTS: The incidence of sinus mucosal abnormalities was 32.1% in the NPC group 
and 20.7% in the control group (P = .041). The patients with NPC demonstrated a
higher incidence of sinus abnormalities in nearly all sinuses. However, only the 
incidence of disease in the posterior ethmoid (P = .002) and sphenoid sinus (P = 
.006) was significantly increased in patients with NPC. The incidence and the
severity of sinus abnormalities in male patients with NPC were significantly
higher than that in female patients. Patients with advanced T stage showed
significantly higher Lund scores (P = .015) than patients with early T stage.
CONCLUSION: The results supported the hypothesis that patients with NPC might be 
prone to have chronic infection and might be partially immunocompromised by
Epstein-Barr virus. Female patients may have an inherited genetic advantage that 
protects against Epstein-Barr virus infection or lessens its devastating effects.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjoto.2008.06.014 
PMID: 19720246  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
