

3015. J Pathol. 2013 Oct;231(2):158-67. doi: 10.1002/path.4240.

Identification of a recurrent transforming UBR5-ZNF423 fusion gene in
EBV-associated nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Chung GT(1), Lung RW, Hui AB, Yip KY, Woo JK, Chow C, Tong CY, Lee SD, Yuen JW,
Lun SW, Tso KK, Wong N, Tsao SW, Yip TT, Busson P, Kim H, Seo JS, O'Sullivan B,
Liu FF, To KF, Lo KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, State Key Laboratory in
Oncology in South China, Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, SAR; Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Science, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, SAR.

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a distinct type of head and neck cancer which
is prevalent in southern China, south-east Asia and northern Africa. The
development and stepwise progression of NPC involves accumulation of multiple
gross genetic changes during the clonal expansion of Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV)-infected nasopharyngeal epithelial cell population. Here, using paired-end 
whole-transcriptome sequencing, we discovered a number of chimeric fusion
transcripts in a panel of EBV-positive tumour lines. Among these transcripts, a
novel fusion of ubiquitin protein ligase E3 component n-recognin 5 (UBR5) on
8q22.3 and zinc finger protein 423 (ZNF423) on 16q12.1, identified from the NPC
cell line C666-1, was recurrently detected in 12/144 (8.3%) of primary tumours.
The fusion gene contains exon 1 of UBR5 and exons 7-9 of ZNF423 and produces a 94
amino acid chimeric protein including the original C-terminal EBF binding domain 
(ZF29-30) of ZNF423. Notably, the growth of NPC cells with UBR5-ZNF423
rearrangement is dependent on expression of this fusion protein. Knock-down of
UBR5-ZNF423 by fusion-specific siRNA significantly inhibited the cell
proliferation and colony-forming ability of C666-1 cells. The transforming
ability of UBR5-ZNF423 fusion was also confirmed in NIH3T3 fibroblasts.
Constitutive expression of UBR5-ZNF423 in NIH3T3 fibroblasts significantly
enhanced its anchorage-independent growth in soft agar and induced tumour
formation in a nude mouse model. These findings suggest that expression of
UBR5-ZNF423 protein might contribute to the transformation of a subset of NPCs,
possibly by altering the activity of EBFs (early B cell factors). Identification 
of the oncogenic UBR5-ZNF423 provides new potential opportunities for therapeutic
intervention in NPC.

Â© 2013 The Authors. Journal of Pathology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on
behalf of Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

DOI: 10.1002/path.4240 
PMCID: PMC4166696
PMID: 23878065  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
