

3016. Liver Int. 2010 Oct;30(9):1247-58. doi: 10.1111/j.1478-3231.2010.02303.x.

Risk factors and incidence of de novo malignancy in liver transplant recipients: 
a systematic review.

Chak E(1), Saab S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, UCLA-Oliver View Medical Center, Pfleger Liver
Institute, Sylmar, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Orthotopic liver transplant (OLT) is an established life saving procedure for
both acute and chronic liver failure, but incidences and risk factors for
development of these malignancies are yet to be established. To determine the
incidences and risk factors associated with de novo malignancy after OLT. We
performed a systematic review of relevant epidemiological studies available on
MEDLINE, which provided information on the incidences and risk factors for the
development malignancies in adult OLT recipients published from 1983 to 2009. All
data was compiled from retrospective studies. Independent risk factors for the
development of de novo malignancy in adult OLT recipients were identified to be
statistically significant including immunosuppression, hepatitis C virus
infection, smoking, alcoholic cirrhosis and sun exposure. OLT recipients with
smoking and alcohol history are of particular risk for head and neck and lung
cancers. Primary sclerosing cholangitis and inflammatory bowel disease were found
to be independent risk factors for colon cancer. Adult OLT recipients are at
increased risk for the development of post-transplant malignancies and obviates
the need for surveillance protocols that are safe and cost-effective. OLT
recipients should be advised on taking proper precautions in the sun, smoking
cessation, and eliminating alcohol consumption. Given the emergence of alcoholic 
cirrhosis as a leading indication for liver transplantation, the early detection 
of lung and head and neck cancers is of particular importance.

Â© 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1478-3231.2010.02303.x 
PMID: 20602682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
