

3017. Histopathology. 2015 May;66(6):856-63. doi: 10.1111/his.12589. Epub 2015 Jan 23.

The spectrum of rare morphological variants of cutaneous epithelioid
angiosarcoma.

Wood A(1), Mentzel T, van Gorp J, Flucke U, Huschka U, Schneider J, Bacchi CE,
Calonje E, Brenn T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Western General Hospital and The University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.

AIMS: Unusual cytoplasmic alterations have recently been reported in poorly
differentiated cutaneous angiosarcoma, making an accurate diagnosis challenging. 
As these tumours remain poorly documented, we aimed to study their
clinicopathological characteristics more comprehensively.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Six cutaneous angiosarcomas with unusual cytoplasmic
alterations were identified from referral files. All tumours arose as nodules or 
plaques (range: 05-195 mm) on sun-damaged skin of the head and neck of elderly
males (median age: 76.5 years). Histologically, the tumours were composed of
enlarged epithelioid cells showing prominent signet ring (n = 3), foam (n = 2) or
granular cell (n = 1) change. Vasoformative elements were only focally noted. By 
immunohistochemistry, all tumours expressed CD31 and avian v-ets erythroblastosis
virus E26 oncogene homologue (ERG). Foam cell change was associated with
additional expression of CD68 and CD163. Follow-up (median: 8 months) showed
death from disease (n = 1), death from a gastrointestinal bleed (n = 1), and a
cutaneous metastasis (n = 1). Only two patients are alive with no evidence of
disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings outline the morphological spectrum of cytoplasmic
change in cutaneous angiosarcoma. Awareness and a high degree of suspicion in the
context of tumours affecting sun-damaged skin of the elderly are necessary to
direct appropriate immunohistochemical work-up with inclusion of the endothelial 
cell markers CD31 and ERG.

Â© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/his.12589 
PMID: 25330326  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
