

3020. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2016 Aug;23:21-8. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2016.05.003. Epub 
2016 May 18.

Follicular dendritic cell sarcoma: clinicopathologic study of 15 cases with
emphasis on novel expression of MDM2, somatostatin receptor 2A, and PD-L1.

Agaimy A(1), Michal M(2), Hadravsky L(3), Michal M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital, Erlangen, Germany. Electronic
address: abbas.agaimy@uk-erlangen.de.
(2)Department of Pathology, Charles University, Biomedical Center, Faculty of
Medicine in Plzen and Charles University Hospital Plzen, Plzen, Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Plzen, Czech
Republic; Department of Pathology, Charles University, 3rd Medical Faculty and
Charles University Hospital Royal Vineyards, Prague, Czech Republic.
(4)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Plzen, Czech
Republic.

Follicular dendritic cell sarcoma (FDCS) is a rare low-grade neoplasm with the
phenotype of FDC cells. This rare sarcoma has been well known for being mistaken 
for a variety of neoplasms (mainly meningioma), particularly at extranodal sites.
Diagnosis of FDCS mainly relies on characteristic histologic appearance
supplemented by immunohistochemistry and electron microscopy. In this study, we
reviewed 15 FDCSs retrieved from our consultation files and stained them for
newly reported or novel markers (PD-L1, Rb1, MDM2, and somatostatin receptor 2A
[SSTR2A]) in addition to conventional FDC markers. Patients were 7 men and 7
women (1 unspecified) with a mean age of 47 years (20-75 years). The tumor site
was lymph nodes (6) or spleen (2), both (1) and extranodal sites of head and neck
(4) or abdominal cavity (2). Treatment was variable combinations of surgery and
aggressive chemotherapy/radiotherapy. Four of 8 patients with follow-up died of
disease within 1 to 10 years. All tumors expressed at least 1 FDC marker: CD21
(8/13), CD23 (2/13), CD35 (8/12), CNA.42 (13/14), Clusterin (8/13), Fascin
(15/15) and D2-40/podoplanin (7/14). Epstein-Barr virus (EBER-1/2 in situ
hybridization) was performed successfully in 10 conventional variants; all were
negative. Five of 14 cases (36%) stained strongly for SSTR2A with a distinctive
membranous pattern. Residual lymphoid follicles surrounding some of the tumors
stained similarly for SSTR2A. Seven (54%) of 13 assessable cases showed moderate 
to strong membranous staining for PD-L1 in greater than 5% of the neoplastic
cells. The Rb1 antigen was lost in 4 (28%) of 14 cases. MDM2 stained less than 5%
to 20% of the tumor cells in 5 (36%) of 14 cases; 2 of them showed amplification 
by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). CDK4 was negative except for weak
staining in 1 of 14 cases. This study adds to the existing few clinicopathologic 
series on FDCS and represents the first study to show MDM2 amplification in this 
entity. Our results regarding frequent SSTR2A expression in FDCS are novel and
might be of potential diagnostic and therapeutic relevance. SSTR2A expression in 
FDCS represents a further confusing factor when thinking of meningioma which
uniformly expresses this receptor. FDCS occurring within the retroperitoneum
and/or the abdominal cavity may closely mimic dedifferentiated liposarcoma,
particularly if MDM2 positive and/or amplified and should thus be carefully
assessed for expression of FDC markers.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2016.05.003 
PMID: 27402219  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
