

3026. J Med Microbiol. 2011 Oct;60(Pt 10):1534-8. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.031146-0. Epub
2011 May 19.

A rare, fatal case of invasive spinal aspergillosis in an antiretroviral-naive,
HIV-infected man with pre-existing lung colonization.

Rossouw I(1), Goedhals D, van der Merwe J, Stallenberg V, Govender N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Virology, National Health Laboratory
Service (NHLS)/University of the Free State, Bloemfontein, Republic of South
Africa.

Infection of the central nervous system (CNS) is a rare but devastating
complication of invasive aspergillosis. We report a case of invasive
aspergillosis with spinal involvement in a human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV)-infected patient without neutropenia. A 42-year-old, antiretroviral-na√Øve, 
HIV-infected man presented with progressive weakness in the lower limbs and
urinary and faecal incontinence for 2 weeks. The patient had been prescribed
broad-spectrum antibiotics and prednisone. He had upper motor neuron signs and a 
sensory level at T1, with accompanying neck stiffness on flexion. Magnetic
resonance imaging revealed diffuse abnormal signals of the vertebral bodies in
the lower cervical and thoracic areas, with cord compression in the C2 and C3
region and signal distortions of the T2 and T3 vertebral bodies. Chest X-ray and 
computerized tomography demonstrated post-tuberculous apical cavities with
suspected fungal colonization. Histopathology of an extradural spinal lesion at
T1/T2 suggested invasive aspergillosis. The patient was started on fluconazole in
response to the histopathological evidence of Aspergillus infection, but died
within 3 weeks. Post-mortem analysis of the biopsy sample by PCR identified the
infectious agent as Aspergillus fumigatus. Atypically, his CD4(+) T-cell count
was 239 cells mm(-3) and he had no evidence of neutropenia. Invasive
aspergillosis should be considered as part of the differential diagnosis among
HIV-infected patients with non-specific, focal CNS symptoms, even among those
without classical risk factors such as neutropenia, and aggressive antifungal
therapy should be instituted as early as possible.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.031146-0 
PMID: 21596908  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
