
Conflict of interest statement: The author has declared that no competing
interests exist.


3038. FP Essent. 2016 Nov;450:22-27.

Immunology Update: Long-Term Care of Solid Organ Transplant Recipients.

Starr SP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family Medicine Louisiana State University School of Medicine,
1542 Tulane Ave, New Orleans, LA 70112.

Nearly 31,000 US patients received solid organ transplants in 2015 and the number
is increasing. Care of transplant recipients includes management of a variety of 
common posttransplantation issues. Skin cancers are common because of
immunosuppression and require skin examinations at intervals. Patients should be 
educated about the need to report new skin lesions. The rates of other cancers
also are increased, including cancers of the head and neck, lung, esophagus,
cervix, and urinary tract. Osteoporosis is common in transplant recipients;
monitoring and early therapy are important. Patients should not smoke, and
vaccinations should be current except for live-virus vaccines, which are
contraindicated in patients with immunosuppression. Family physicians should be
familiar with the posttransplantation immunosuppression drugs their patients are 
taking and know their adverse effects and drug interactions. For example,
calcineurin inhibitors (eg, cyclosporine, tacrolimus) can impair renal function
and increase rates of hypertension and myocardial ischemia. They also interact
with statins, macrolide antibiotics, diltiazem, and other drugs. Interval
laboratory testing is required to monitor the health of the transplanted organ
(eg, renal function tests for kidney transplants, transaminases for liver
transplants). Finally, clinicians should remain alert for development of
opportunistic infection.

Written permission from the American Academy of Family Physicians is required for
reproduction of this material in whole or in part in any form or medium.


PMID: 27869439  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
