

3039. RETRACTED ARTICLE

Oral Oncol. 2011 Sep;47(9):847-54. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2011.06.502. Epub 
2011 Jul 16.

Nef from SIV(mac239) decreases proliferation and migration of adenoid-cystic
carcinoma cells and inhibits angiogenesis.

Cai C(1), Rodepeter FR, Rossmann A, Teymoortash A, Lee JS, Quint K, Di Fazio P,
Ocker M, Werner JA, Mandic R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital 
Giessen and Marburg, Campus Marburg, Baldingerstrasse, D-35033 Marburg, Germany.

Retraction in
    Oral Oncol. 2012 Jan;48(1):95.

The HIV/SIV accessory protein Nef is known to down-modulate cell surface
receptors that are required for virus entry such as CD4, CCR5 and CXCR4 to block 
lethal viral superinfection of the infected cell. The chemokine receptor CXCR4
also plays an important role in promoting cell proliferation, metastasis and
tumor angiogenesis. Therefore it was of interest to evaluate if Nef can
down-regulate CXCR4 in tumor cells since this could affect these critical
prognostic parameters. The CXCR4-expressing cell line ACC3 that was derived from 
a salivary gland adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) of the head and neck was
transfected with Nef from SIV(mac239) and cell surface expression of the receptor
was monitored by FACS analysis. Real time proliferation of cells was measured
with the xCELLigence system (Roche, Mannheim, Germany). Cell migration was
detected by an in vitro scratch assay. Similarly, COS-7 cells were co-transfected
with CXCR4 and Nef and were treated as described for ACC3. In vitro tube
formation was deployed to assess the effect of Nef on angiogenesis. siRNA was
used for CXCR4 knockdown. Cell surface down-modulation of endogenous CXCR4 could 
be observed in ACC3 cells after Nef-transfection as well as in COS-7 cells after 
co-transfection of CXCR4 and Nef. Proliferation as well as migration of
Nef-transfected ACC3 tumor cells appeared significantly reduced. In vitro tube
formation was significantly lowered after Nef-transfection or CXCR4 knockdown
with siRNA. SIV-Nef could serve as an interesting tool to study the biologic
behavior of CXCR4-expressing tumors such as ACC. Deploying SIV-Nef thereby could 
help in the discovery of new therapeutic approaches for the treatment of ACC and 
other CXCR4-expressing tumors.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2011.06.502 
PMID: 21763177  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
