

3041. Cancer Res. 2009 Jul 1;69(13):5269-84. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-1750. Epub
2009 Jun 2.

Cancer prevention: from 1727 to milestones of the past 100 years.

Lippman SM(1), Hawk ET.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology, Unit 432, The
University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard,
Houston, TX 77030-4009, USA. slippman@mdanderson.org

The rich, multidisciplinary history of cancer prevention recounted here begins
with surgical and workplace recommendations of the 1700s and ends with 2009
results of the enormous (35,535 men) Selenium and Vitamin E [prostate] Cancer
Prevention Trial (SELECT). This history comprises a fascinating array of
chemopreventive, vaccine, surgical, and behavioral science research, both
preclinical and clinical. Preclinical milestones of cancer prevention include the
1913 and 1916 mouse studies by Lathrop and Loeb of cancer development associated 
with pregnancy or cancer prevention through castration (oophorectomy), preventing
chemically induced mouse carcinogenesis as early as 1929, energy restriction
studies in the 1940s, the 1950s discoveries and later molecular characterizations
of field cancerization and multistep carcinogenesis, and the effects of
angiogenesis inhibition in genetically engineered mice reported in 2009. The
extraordinary panoply of clinical research includes numerous large and smaller
chemoprevention studies of nutritional supplements, other dietary approaches, a
Bacillus Calmette-Gu√©rin trial in 1976, molecular-targeted agents, and agents to 
prevent infection-related cancers such as hepatitis B virus vaccine to prevent
liver cancer in 1984. Clinical surgical prevention includes removal of
intraepithelial neoplasia detected by screening (including Pap testing developed 
in 1929 and culposcopy for cervical premalignancy and colonoscopy and polypectomy
to prevent colorectal cancer begun in the 1960s) and prophylactic surgeries, such
as in Lynch syndrome patients begun in 1977. Behavioral studies include smoking
cessation and control beginning in the 1950s, obesity control rooted in studies
of 1841, and genetic-counseling and cancer-survivorship studies. This history of 
pioneering events may help in better understanding who we are and what we want to
achieve as cancer prevention researchers and practitioners.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-1750 
PMID: 19491253  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
