

3042. Exp Hematol. 2013 Aug;41(8):711-8. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2013.03.009. Epub 2013
Apr 10.

Soluble ICAM-1 secretion and its functional role as an autocrine growth factor in
nasal NK/T cell lymphoma cells.

Takahara M(1), Nagato T, Komabayashi Y, Yoshino K, Ueda S, Kishibe K, Harabuchi
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Asahikawa Medical
University, Asahikawa, Japan. miki@asahikawa-med.ac.jp

Nasal natural killer-T cell lymphoma (NNKTL) is associated with the Epstein-Barr 
virus and has distinct histologic features, such as angiocentric and polymorphous
lymphoreticular infiltrates that contain too many cell types, including tumor and
inflammatory cells. We have shown previously that intercellular adhesion molecule
(ICAM)-1 is expressed in NNKTL cells, and that soluble ICAM-1 (sICAM-1) is
significantly increased in patients' sera. However, the functional role of
sICAM-1 remains unknown. In this study, we found that Epstein-Barr virus-positive
NNKTL cell line SNK6 secreted sICAM-1 in a time-dependent manner. Moreover,
exogenous sICAM-1 enhanced the growth of SNK6 cells in a dose-dependent manner.
In comparison, neutralizing ICAM-1 and LFA-1 antibodies, as well as the LFA-1
blocker simvastatin, caused a dose-dependent reduction in the number of viable
SNK6 cells. Double immunohistologic staining of NNKTL tissues confirmed that CD56
positive lymphoma cells coexpressed LFA-1. Moreover, serum sICAM-1 levels in
NNKTL patients decreased after treatment, suggesting that the levels reflected
disease progression. We conclude that NNKTL cells secrete sICAM-1 that acts as an
autocrine factor for lymphoma progression, and suggest that simvastatin could be 
a potential candidate to treat NNKTL.

Copyright Â© 2013 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exphem.2013.03.009 
PMID: 23583640  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
