

3043. Mediators Inflamm. 2016;2016:9343460. doi: 10.1155/2016/9343460. Epub 2016 Aug
28.

Inflammation-Related DNA Damage and Cancer Stem Cell Markers in Nasopharyngeal
Carcinoma.

Wang S(1), Ma N(2), Zhao W(3), Midorikawa K(3), Kawanishi S(4), Hiraku Y(3),
Oikawa S(3), Zhang Z(5), Huang G(5), Murata M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Molecular Medicine, Mie University Graduate
School of Medicine, Tsu, Mie, Japan; Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck
Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, China.
(2)Faculty of Nursing Science, Suzuka University of Medical Science, Suzuka, Mie,
Japan.
(3)Department of Environmental and Molecular Medicine, Mie University Graduate
School of Medicine, Tsu, Mie, Japan.
(4)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Suzuka University of Medical Science,
Suzuka, Mie, Japan.
(5)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital 
of Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, China.

Nitrative and oxidative DNA damage plays an important role in
inflammation-related carcinogenesis. To investigate the involvement of stem cells
in Epstein-Barr virus infection-related nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC), we used
double immunofluorescence staining to examine several cancer stem/progenitor cell
markers (CD44v6, CD24, and ALDH1A1) in NPC tissues and NPC cell lines. We also
measured 8-nitroguanine formation as an indicator of inflammation-related DNA
lesions. The staining intensity of 8-nitroguanine was significantly higher in
cancer cells and inflammatory cells in the stroma of NPC tissues than in chronic 
nasopharyngitis tissues. Expression levels of CD44v6 and ALDH1A1 were
significantly increased in cancer cells of primary NPC specimens in comparison to
chronic nasopharyngitis tissues. Similarly, more intense staining of CD44v6 and
ALDH1A1 was detected in an NPC cell line than in an immortalized nasopharyngeal
epithelial cell line. In the case of CD24 staining, there was no significant
difference between NPC and chronic nasopharyngitis tissues. 8-Nitroguanine was
detected in both CD44v6- and ALDH1A1-positive stem cells in NPC tissues. In
conclusion, CD44v6 and ALDH1A1 are candidate stem cell markers for NPC, and the
increased formation of DNA lesions by inflammation may result in the mutation of 
stem cells, leading to tumor development in NPC.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/9343460 
PMCID: PMC5018333
PMID: 27647953  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
