

3048. Adv Otorhinolaryngol. 2011;72:6-19. doi: 10.1159/000324586. Epub 2011 Aug 18.

Moving towards a new era in the research of tonsils and mucosal barriers.

Yamanaka N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Infection and Immunity
Research Center, Wakayama Medical University, Wakayama, Japan.
ynobi@wakayama-med.ac.jp

The palatine and nasopharyngeal tonsils (adenoids) are lymphoepithelial tissues
located in strategic anatomical areas of the oral pharynx and nasopharynx. These 
immunocompetent tissues represent the first line of defense against ingested or
inhaled foreign proteins such as bacteria, viruses, or food antigens.
Accompanying the advances being made in the field of medicine today, the role of 
the tonsils in immunocompetence is becoming extremely important. Upper
respiratory tract infections such as acute otitis media, acute rhinosinusitis and
acute pharyngo-tonsillitis are diseases that occur with extremely high frequency,
and the antimicrobial agents used to treat these diseases account for a large
proportion of health care costs. The increasingly refractory nature of upper
respiratory tract infections caused by drug-resistant bacteria has become a major
worldwide concern. The elucidation of the immune functions of the tonsils and
mucosal membranes of the upper respiratory tract is considered to have important 
significance. The tonsils are also considered to play an important role as one of
the causes of sleep apnea syndrome, and have been reported to be intimately
involved in the manifestation of IgA nephropathy and palmoplantar pustulosis, a
kind of skin disorder. Interest has continued to grow in this symposium with each
session ever since it was first held in Kyoto, Japan in 1987. Since then, the
symposium has been held every 3-4 years; in Pavia in 1991, in Sapporo in 1995, in
Ghent in 1999, in Wakayama in 2003, and in Siena in 2006. Since the 5th symposium
in Wakayama, the topics were extended to mucosal barriers of upper airways
including the mucosal immune system, innate immunity, and mucosal vaccine. Recent
fine technologies and information on molecular biological approaches for upper
airways will continue to advance our understanding of epidemiology, etiology,
pathogenesis, diagnosis and management of tonsil-related disorders and various
upper respiratory tract infections such as otitis media and rhinosinusitis.
Moreover, in the era of drug-resistant microbes, we should exert more effort to
develop powerful and effective mucosal vaccines against pathogens in upper
airways.

Copyright Â© 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000324586 
PMID: 21865680  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
