

3049. Mini Rev Med Chem. 2018;18(2):173-183. doi: 10.2174/1389557517666170717125821.

Nutlin-3, A p53-Mdm2 Antagonist for Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma Treatment.

Yee-Lin V(1), Pooi-Fong W(1), Soo-Beng AK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, 50603
Kuala Lumpur. Malaysia.
(2)Molecular Pathology Unit, Cancer Research Centre, Institute for Medical
Research, 50588 Kuala Lumpur. Malaysia.

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a form of head and neck cancer of
multifactorial etiologies that is highly prevalent among men in the population of
Southern China and Southeast Asia. NPC has claimed many thousands of lives
worldwide; but the low awareness of NPC remains a hindrance in early diagnosis
and prevention of the disease. NPC is highly responsive to radiotherapy and
chemotherapy, but radiocurable NPC is still dependent on concurrent treatment of 
megavoltage radiotherapy with chemotherapy. Despite a significant reduction in
loco-regional and distant metastases, radiotherapy alone has failed to provide a 
significant improvement in the overall survival rate of NPC, compared to
chemotherapy. In addition, chemo-resistance persists as the major challenge in
the management of metastatic NPC although the survival rate of advanced
metastatic NPC has significantly improved with the administration of chemotherapy
adjunctive to radiotherapy. In this regard, targeted molecular therapy could be
explored for the discovery of alternative NPC therapies. Nutlin-3, a small
molecule inhibitor that specifically targets p53-Mdm2 interaction offers new
therapeutic opportunities by enhancing cancer cell growth arrest and apoptosis
through the restoration of the p53-mediated tumor suppression pathway while
producing minimal cytotoxicity and side effects. This review discusses the
potential use of Nutlin-3 as a p53-activating drug and the future directions of
its clinical research for NPC treatment.

CopyrightÂ© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at
epub@benthamscience.org.

DOI: 10.2174/1389557517666170717125821 
PMCID: PMC5769085
PMID: 28714398  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
