

3050. Transplant Proc. 2013 Sep;45(7):2729-32. doi: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2013.07.050.

De novo malignancies following liver transplantation: results from a multicentric
study in central and southern Italy, 1990-2008.

Ettorre GM(1), Piselli P, Galatioto L, Rendina M, Nudo F, Sforza D, Miglioresi L,
Fantola G, Cimaglia C, Vennarecci G, Vizzini GB, Di Leo A, Rossi M, Tisone G,
Zamboni F, Santoro R, Agresta A, Puro V, Serraino D.

Author information: 
(1)POIT "S.Camillo-Spallanzani", Rome, Itlay.

OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to quantify incidence rates (IR) and
risks of de novo tumors (except nonmelanoma skin cancers) in patients who
underwent orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) in central and southern Italy.
METHODS: Data were collected on 1675 patients (75.5% males) who underwent OLT in 
six Italian transplantation centers in central and southern Italy (1990-2008).
The time at risk of cancer (person years [PY]) was computed from OLT to the date 
of cancer diagnosis, death, or last follow-up, whichever occurred first. The
number of observed cancer cases were compared with the expected one using data
from population-based cancer registries. We computed gender- and age-standardized
incidence ratios (SIRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs).
RESULTS: During 10,104.3 PYs (median follow-up, 5.2 years), 98 patients (5.9% of 
the total) were diagnosed with a de novo malignancy (for a total of 100
diagnoses). Twenty-two of these cancers were post-transplantation
lymphoproliferative disorders (PTLD; 18 non-Hodgkin lymphoma [NHL] and 2
Hodgkin's lymphoma [HL]), 6 were Kaposi's sarcoma (KS), and 72 were solid tumors 
(19 head and neck [H&N], 13 lung, 11 colon-rectum, 6 bladder, and 4 melanoma).
The overall incidence was 9.9 cases/10(3) PYs, with a 1.4-fold significantly
increased SIR (95% CI, l.2-1.7). Significantly increased SIRs were observed for
KS (37.3), PTLD (3.9), larynx (5.7), melanoma (3.1), tongue (7.1), and H&N (4.5) 
cancers.
CONCLUSIONS: These results confirmed that OLT patients are at greater risk for
cancer, mainly malignancies either virus-associated or related to pre-existent
factors (eg, alcohols). These observations point to the need to improve cancer
surveillance after OLT. The on-going enrollment of patients in the present cohort
study will help to elucidate the burden of cancer after OLT and better identify
risk factors associated with its development.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2013.07.050 
PMID: 24034034  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
