

3053. J Med Imaging Radiat Oncol. 2015 Dec;59(6):681-6. doi: 10.1111/1754-9485.12354.
Epub 2015 Sep 7.

The value of follow-up FDG-PET/CT in the management and prognosis of patients
with HPV-positive oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma.

Taghipour M(1), Marcus C(1), Califano J(2), Fakhry C(2)(3), Subramaniam
RM(1)(2)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Russell H Morgan Department of Radiology and Radiological Sciences, Johns
Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins Medical 
Institutions, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD,
USA.
(5)Department of Health Policy and Management, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of 
Public Health, Baltimore, MD, USA.

INTRODUCTION: To establish the accuracy of follow-up fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)
positron emission tomography (PET)/CT and the impact of FDG PET/CT result on
management decisions and patient outcome prediction (overall and progression free
survival) in human papilloma virus (HPV)-positive oropharyngeal squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We included 96 HPV-positive oropharyngeal SCC (OPSCC)
patients with 254 follow-up PET/CT scans in the study. The PET/CT result accuracy
was established with histopathology or 6-month clinical follow-up as reference
standard. The impact on change in management was established for each follow-up
PET/CT scan. Overall survival was evaluated using Kaplan-Meier plots with a
Log-rank test.
RESULTS: The sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative
predictive value and accuracy of the follow-up FDG-PET/CT were 97.0%, 92.5%,
67.0%, 99.5% and 93.1%, respectively. Follow-up PET/CT results were helpful in
excluding tumour in 22% (9/41) of scans performed with prior clinical suspicion
of disease and identified potential disease in 9.9% (21/213) scans performed
without prior clinical suspicion. There was a change in management after 12.6%
(32/254) scans. In 84.3% (214/254) scans, the patients were either observed or
the same treatment was continued. The overall survival differed significantly
between patients with a negative versus positive follow-up scan (log rank
P < 0.001). The median progression free survival was 28 months, if the first
follow-up scan performed within 6-12 months post-treatment completion was
negative.
CONCLUSION: Follow-up FDG PET/CT scans have an impact on the management plan and 
add value to clinical assessment in patients with HPV-positive OPSCC.

© 2015 The Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Radiologists.

DOI: 10.1111/1754-9485.12354 
PMID: 26768092  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
