

3057. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2017 Jun;26(6):677-685. doi:
10.1080/13543784.2017.1324568. Epub 2017 May 8.

Investigational drugs for nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Ma BBY(1)(2)(3), Hui EP(1)(2)(3), Chan ATC(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)a State Key Laboratory in Oncology in South China , Sir YK Pao Centre for
Cancer , Hong Kong SAR , China.
(2)b Department of Clinical Oncology , Hong Kong Cancer Institute , Hong Kong SAR
, China.
(3)c Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences , The Chinese University of Hong
Kong , Hong Kong SAR , China.

INTRODUCTION: Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is endemic to Southern China and
Asia and is etiologically associated with the Epstein Barr virus (EBV). Whole
exome and genome sequencing (WES, WGS) studies of NPC have reported several
actionable therapeutic targets, and that the mutational load of NPC maybe
comparable to that of squamous head and neck cancer. These unique biological
characteristics have been exploited as potential targets and a wide range of
investigational drugs are being investigated in clinical trials. Area covered:
This review focused on the latest clinical development of the most promising
classes of investigational agents in the treatment of advanced NPC. These include
inhibitors of tumor angiogenesis, kinase signaling pathways and immunotherapy.
Expert opinion: Checkpoint inhibitors and EBV-specific T-cell therapy have shown 
promising activity in early phase clinical trials, and are being further
evaluated in randomized studies. For patients whose tumors express genetic
alterations that are known to predict response to kinase inhibitors, novel trial 
designs such as an 'Umbrella' study may be considered given the abundance of
targeted agents that are now available for clinical evaluation. It is envisioned 
that regulatory approval for new drugs for advanced NPC will occur in the near
future.

DOI: 10.1080/13543784.2017.1324568 
PMID: 28446055  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
