

3060. Am J Surg Pathol. 2014 Sep;38(9):1274-81. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000236.

SMARCB1(INI1)-deficient sinonasal basaloid carcinoma: a novel member of the
expanding family of SMARCB1-deficient neoplasms.

Agaimy A(1), Koch M, Lell M, Semrau S, Dudek W, Wachter DL, Knöll A, Iro H,
Haller F, Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)*Institute of Pathology †Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck
Surgery ‡Institute of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology Departments of
§Radiation Therapy ∥Thoracic Surgery ¶Institute of Virology, University Hospital 
of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.

Poorly differentiated sinonasal carcinomas are a heterogenous group of aggressive
neoplasms that encompasses squamous cell carcinoma including basaloid variant,
lymphoepithelial carcinoma, sinonasal undifferentiated carcinoma, and
neuroendocrine-type small cell carcinoma. We herein describe 3 cases of a
hitherto unreported variant combining features of basaloid carcinoma with
variable intermingled rhabdoid cells. Patients were 2 women (aged 28 and 35) and 
a man (52 y) who presented with sinonasal masses. All had advanced local disease 
with bone involvement (pT4). None had a history of irradiation or a family
history of rhabdoid tumors. Treatment was surgery and adjuvant chemoradiation.
One patient developed liver, lung, pleural, and pericardial metastases (63 mo)
and is currently (70 mo) alive under palliative treatment. Another developed
recurrent cervical lymph node metastases and died of disease 8.5 years later. The
youngest patient was disease-free at last follow-up 7 years later. Histologic
features were very similar in all 3 cases and showed intimate admixture of
compact basaloid cell nests with peripheral palisading, perivascular
pseudorosettes, and a few scattered rhabdoid cells. Rhabdoid cells were more
extensive in the metastasis in 1 case but formed a minor inconspicuous component 
in the primary tumors in all cases. Striking features common to all cases were
(1) basaloid "blue" appearance at low power, (2) papilloma-like exophytic
component, (3) extensive pagetoid surface growth with prominent denuding
features, and (4) replacement of underlying mucous glands mimicking an inverted
papilloma. Clear-cut origin from benign papilloma and overt squamous
differentiation were lacking. Diffuse (2) or partial (1) p16 expression was
noted, but all cases lacked human papillomavirus DNA by molecular tests. In situ 
hybridization was negative for Epstein-Barr virus. Immunohistochemistry showed
diffuse expression of pancytokeratin. CK5 and vimentin showed intermingling of
CK5/vimentin basaloid and CK5/vimentin rhabdoid cells. Complete loss of nuclear
SMARCB1 expression was seen in all cases including also the denuding carcinoma in
situ-like surface lesions. To our knowledge, this variant of sinonasal carcinoma 
has not been reported before. The identical features in all 3 cases suggest a
specific disease rather than a nonspecific dedifferentiated phenotype. Awareness 
of this rare variant and thus reporting of additional cases is necessary for
defining its full morphologic and biological spectrum.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000236 
PMCID: PMC4141899
PMID: 24832165  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
