

3061. Int J Cancer. 2015 Dec 15;137(12):2994-9. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29660. Epub 2015 Jul
14.

Deep brush-based cytology in tonsils resected for benign diseases.

Franceschi S(1), Combes JD(1), Dalstein V(2)(3), Caudroy S(2)(3), Clifford G(1), 
Gheit T(1), Tommasino M(1), Clavel C(2)(3), Lacau St Guily J(4), Birembaut
P(2)(3); Study of Natural History of Human Papillomavirus Infection and
Precancerous Lesions in the Tonsils (SPLIT).

Collaborators: McKay-Chopin S, Albert S, Barry B, Hourseau M, Berrebi D, Van Den 
Abeele T, Tessier N, Galmiche-Rolland L, Leboulanger N, Couloigner V, de
Crouy-Chanel O, Perie S, Lesnik M, Lefevre M, Coulomb A, Denoyelle F, Badet JM,
Mauvais O, Valmary-Degano S, Pretet JL, Lechapt-Zalchman E, Babin E, Brambilla E,
Lantuejoul S, Righini C, Coulibaly B, Bessede JP, Lerat J, Ceruse P, Cosmidis A, 
Costes V, Garrel R, Cassagnau E, Malard O, Chapuis H, Lallemant B, Levillain P,
Dufour X, Merol JC, Vergez S, Uro-Coste E, Rousselot C, Moriniere S, Schultz P,
Onea M, Denoux Y, Bach C.

Author information: 
(1)International Agency for Research on Cancer, 69372 Lyon cedex 08, France.
(2)CHU Reims, Hôpital Maison Blanche, Laboratoire Pol Bouin Histologie -
Cytologie - Biologie Cellulaire, Reims, F-51092, France.
(3)INSERM, UMR-S 903, Reims, F-51092 France, Université de Reims
Champagne-Ardenne, Faculté de Médecine, Reims, F-51095 France.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, Faculty of
Medicine-Pierre Et Marie Curie University-Paris VI and Tenon Hospital, Assistance
Publique Hôpitaux De Paris, France.

A fraction of oropharyngeal cancer (OPC), especially in the tonsil, is caused by 
human papillomavirus (HPV), mainly HPV16. Noninvasive diagnostic methods to
detect precancerous lesions in the tonsil would be useful, e.g., liquid-based
cytology (LBC). However, ill-characterized precancerous lesions may be hidden in 
the depth of the tonsillar crypts. We therefore conducted a study on HPV and
tonsillar precancerous lesions to evaluate, among other things, the utility of
LBC obtained by deep brushing of the resected tonsils. Two hundred non-paediatric
patients (mean age: 30.3 years) who underwent tonsillectomy for infection-related
conditions (69%) or other conditions (mainly obstructive sleep apnoea, 31%) were 
included. An ultra-sensitive Luminex bead-based platform was used to test for the
DNA of 21 mucosal HPV types; 56% of slides were unsatisfactory due to low number 
of squamous epithelial cells or the masking effect of a large number of
lymphocytes. Three patients (1.5%; 95% CI: 0.5-4.3) showed suspicious cytological
findings (atypical squamous cells-cannot exclude high-grade squamous
intraepithelial lesion, ASC-H) while 3 others were HPV-positive (2 for HPV16 and 
1 for HPV39). None of the ASC-H patients and HPV-positive patients showed
dysplasia at histological examination. The rarity of HPV infection in the tonsil 
conflicts with the relatively frequent detection of the virus in the mouth. In
conclusion, aggressive deep brushing of tonsils, while hardly applicable in vivo,
is unlikely to be a reliable method to detect precancerous lesions. The absence
of OPC screening modalities places the priority on multi-purpose primary
prevention strategies, i.e., HPV vaccination and reduction of smoking and
drinking.

© 2015 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.29660 
PMID: 26111735  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
