

3064. Diagn Pathol. 2012 Jun 8;7:64. doi: 10.1186/1746-1596-7-64.

Unusual primary osseous Hodgkin lymphoma in rib with associated soft tissue mass:
a case report and review of literature.

Li Y(1), Wang XB, Tian XY, Li B, Li Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, 58, Zhongshan Road II, Guangzhou, 510080, China.

VIRTUAL SLIDES: Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) typically presents as nodal lesion and may 
involve extranodal sites during the progression of the disease. Primary osseous
HL without any lymph node association is extremely rare and only a few such cases
have been described in the literature. We present a case of unusual primary HL in
rib occurring in a middle-aged female patient. Computed tomography (CT) scan
revealed an osteolytic lesion was located at the right second rib and was
associated with a large soft tissue mass. There was no regional lymph node
involvement. CT scan of neck and abdomen was performed and showed no pathologic
findings, particularly no lymphadenopathy and organomegaly could be observed.
Histologically, typical binucleated Reed-Sternberg (RS) cells and lacunar cells
were scattered in the background of reactive inflammation with infiltration of
lymphocytes, histiocytes and eosinophilic granulocytes. By immunohistochemistry, 
RS cells and lacunar cells were positive for CD15 and CD30 with typical membrane 
and paranuclear dot-like staining pattern. However, these cells were negative for
Epstein-Barr virus detection by in situ hybridization. A diagnosis of primary
osseous HL was made. The patient received systemic chemotherapy and local
radiotherapy, and was on regular follow-up for 24 months. There was no sign of
recurrence of tumor and lymph node or bone marrow involvement. Because there is a
possibility of secondary bone involvement by systemic HL, strict histological
analysis and thorough radiographic examination are suggested to be necessary for 
accurately diagnosing this tumor when it presents as a solitary bone lesion.

DOI: 10.1186/1746-1596-7-64 
PMCID: PMC3464810
PMID: 22682578  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
