

3071. Oral Oncol. 2014 Sep;50(9):798-801. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2014.01.002. Epub
2014 Jan 22.

Novel therapy for nasopharyngeal carcinoma--where are we.

Tsang J(1), Lee VH(1), Kwong DL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Oncology, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region.
(2)Department of Clinical Oncology, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region. Electronic address: dlwkwong@hku.hk.

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is endemic in Southern China, and the South-East
Asia including Hong Kong. We still see patients recur after primary treatment
with radiotherapy or chemo-irradiation. Management of nasopharyngeal carcinoma
remains one of the biggest clinical challenges. There have been breakthroughs in 
early detection, diagnosis, multi-modality treatment and also disease monitoring 
for NPC. Systemic treatment has been crucial to the management of locally
advanced or metastatic NPC. With the advent of molecular targeted therapy and
personalized medicine, novel therapies based on molecular targets of NPC have
become the focus of research and development over the last decade. Furthermore,
as NPC is tightly associated with the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection, the
role of tumor-associated viral antigens in NPC renders it an appealing candidate 
for cellular immunotherapy. This is a review of recent evolving concerted efforts
and the success from our translational research with focus of the recent systemic
novel targeted therapies including the potential role of immunotherapy which may 
offer further clinical benefit to our patients living with NPC. The scientific
basis and latest published results of the relevant clinical trials are
highlighted, demonstrating the ongoing battle against NPC is indeed one of the
most fascinating successes in head and neck oncology.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2014.01.002 
PMID: 24462373  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
