

3073. Pathol Int. 2009 Sep;59(9):681-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2009.02427.x.

Sclerosing encapsulating peritonitis (abdominal cocoon) associated with liver
cirrhosis and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: autopsy case.

Yamada S(1), Tanimoto A, Matsuki Y, Hisada Y, Sasaguri Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, School of Medicine, University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu, Japan.

A case of sclerosing encapsulating peritonitis (SEP) associated with liver
cirrhosis (LC) and complicated by diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is
reported herein. A 49-year-old Japanese man had undergone peritoneo-venous shunt 
against refractory ascites due to hepatitis C virus-positive uncompensated LC for
2 years. After he received a diagnosis of DLBCL of the left neck lymph node 3
months before his death, palliative care was given because of his poor general
condition. He developed severe abdominal distention and pain over 1 week and was 
found to have marked ascites and whole bowel lumped together on abdominal CT. At 
autopsy, the peritoneum was covered with a thick white membrane and the bowel
could not be distinguished, which was macroscopically characterized by a
cocoon-like appearance. Histology indicated a proliferation of diffusely
thickened or hyalinized fibrocollagenous tissue in the entire peritoneum with a
slight chronic inflammatory infiltrate and without remarkable change of mucosa. A
diagnosis of SEP, also known as abdominal cocoon, was established based on these 
features. Additionally, in the abdominal cavity, a large amount of serous ascites
and multiple peritoneal nodules or masses involved by DLBCL were recognized. To
the authors' knowledge this is the first case report of SEP associated with LC
and complicated by the invasion of DLBCL in the abdominal cavity.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2009.02427.x 
PMID: 19712139  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
