

3078. J Bone Miner Res. 2017 Aug;32(8):1615-1624. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.3147. Epub 2017 May
8.

Changes in Bone Mineral Density, Body Composition, Vitamin D Status, and Mineral 
Metabolism in Urban HIV-Positive South African Women Over 12 Months.

Hamill MM(1)(2), Pettifor JM(2), Ward KA(1), Norris SA(2), Prentice A(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Human Nutrition Research, Elsie Widdowson Laboratory,
Cambridge, UK.
(2)South African Medical Research Council (SAMRC)/University of Witswatersrand
Developmental Pathways for Health Research Unit, Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of Witswatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection and antiretroviral therapy (ART) are
associated with bone loss and poor vitamin D status in white populations, though 
their relative roles are not known. No previous studies have examined
longitudinal changes in areal bone mineral density (aBMD), measured by
dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA), or in vitamin D status in HIV-positive
African women. Of 247 premenopausal, urban, black African women from Soweto,
South Africa, initially recruited, 187 underwent anthropometry, DXA scanning and 
blood and urine collections at both baseline and 12 months. Of these, 67 were
HIV-negative throughout (Nref), 60 were HIV-positive with preserved CD4 counts at
baseline (Ppres), and 60 were HIV-positive with low CD4 counts at baseline,
eligible for ART by South African standards of care at the time (Plow). No
participant had been exposed to ART at baseline. By 12 months, 51 Plow women had 
initiated ART, >85% of whom took combined tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (TDF),
lamivudine, and efavirenz. By 12 months, Plow and Nref, but not Ppres, increased 
in body weight and fat mass (group-by-timepoint p ≤ 0.001, p = 0.002,
respectively). Plow had significant decreases in aBMD of 2% to 3%, before and
after size adjustment, at the femoral neck (p ≤ 0.002) and lumbar spine
(p ≤ 0.001), despite significant weight gain. These decreases were associated
with increased bone turnover but there were no significant differences or changes
over time in vitamin D status, serum phosphate concentrations, or renal phosphate
handling. Excluding data from nine Plow women unexposed to ART and 11 Ppres women
who had initiated ART accentuated these findings, suggesting the bone loss in
Plow was related to ART exposure. This is the first study describing DXA-defined 
bone loss in HIV-positive Sub-Saharan African women in association with ART.
Further work is required to establish if bone loss continues with ongoing ART
and, if so, whether this results in increased fracture rates. © 2017 American
Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

© 2017 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.3147 
PMCID: PMC5753880
PMID: 28370356  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
