

3080. Cancer Biol Ther. 2015;16(2):261-7. doi: 10.1080/15384047.2014.1001287.

MiR-1204 sensitizes nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells to paclitaxel both in vitro
and in vivo.

Peng X(1), Cao P, Li J, He D, Han S, Zhou J, Tan G, Li W, Yu F, Yu J, Li Z, Cao
K.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Head and Neck Surgery and Oncology Plastic Surgery; The
Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya Medical School ; Central South University ;
Changsha , Hunan , China.

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is an endemic tumor with a relatively high
incidence in Southern China and Southeast Asia. Paclitaxel combination
chemotherapy has been used for treatment of advanced NPC. However, treatment
failure often occurs due to development of acquired paclitaxel resistance. In
this study, we first established a paclitaxel-resistant CNE-1/Taxol, HNE-2/Taxol 
and 5-8F/Taxol cell sublines by treating the parental CNE-1, HNE-2 and 5-8F cells
with increasing doses of paclitaxel for about 5 months, respectively. Then,
microRNA arrays were used to screen differentially expressed miRNAs between the
CNE-1/Taxol cells and the parental CNE-1 cells. We found 13 differentially
expressed miRNAs, of which miR-1204 was significantly downregulated in the
paclitaxel-resistant CNE-1/Taxol cells. We restored miR-1204 expression in the
CNE-1/Taxol, HNE-2/Taxol and 5-8F/Taxol cells and found that restoration of
miR-1204 re-sensitized the paclitaxel-resistant CNE-1/Taxol, HNE-2/Taxol and
5-8F/Taxol cells to paclitaxel both in vitro. Finally, we demonstrated that
restoration of miR-1204 in significantly inhibits tumor growth in vivo. Thus, our
study provides important information for the development of targeted gene therapy
for reversing paclitaxel resistance in NPC.

DOI: 10.1080/15384047.2014.1001287 
PMCID: PMC4622873
PMID: 25756509  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
