

3085. Glia. 2014 Oct;62(10):1699-712. doi: 10.1002/glia.22709. Epub 2014 Jun 26.

p75NTR is highly expressed in vestibular schwannomas and promotes cell survival
by activating nuclear transcription factor κB.

Ahmad I(1), Yue WY, Fernando A, Clark JJ, Woodson EA, Hansen MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Iowa, Iowa
City, Iowa.

Vestibular schwannomas (VSs) arise from Schwann cells (SCs) and result from the
loss of function of merlin, the protein product of the NF2 tumor suppressor gene.
In contrast to non-neoplastic SCs, VS cells survive long-term in the absence of
axons. We find that p75(NTR) is overexpressed in VSs compared with normal nerves,
both at the transcript and protein level, similar to the response of
non-neoplastic SCs following axotomy. Despite elevated p75(NTR) expression, VS
cells are resistant to apoptosis due to treatment with proNGF, a high affinity
ligand for p75(NTR) . Furthermore, treatment with proNGF protects VS cells from
apoptosis due to c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) inhibition indicating that
p75(NTR) promotes VS cell survival. Treatment of VS cells with proNGF activated
NF-κB while inhibition of JNK with SP600125 or siRNA-mediated knockdown reduced
NF-κB activity. Significantly, proNGF also activated NF-κB in cultures treated
with JNK inhibitors. Thus, JNK activity appears to be required for basal levels
of NF-κB activity but not for proNGF-induced NF-κB activity. To confirm that the 
increase in NF-κB activity contributes to the prosurvival effect of proNGF, we
infected VS cultures with Ad.IκB.SerS32/36A virus, which inhibits NF-κB
activation. Compared with control virus, Ad.IκB.SerS32/36A significantly
increased apoptosis including in VS cells treated with proNGF. Thus, in contrast 
to non-neoplastic SCs, p75(NTR) signaling provides a prosurvival response in VS
cells by activating NF-κB independent of JNK. Such differences may contribute to 
the ability of VS cells to survive long-term in the absence of axons.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/glia.22709 
PMCID: PMC4150679
PMID: 24976126  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
