

3086. Autoimmun Rev. 2016 Jun;15(6):564-70. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2016.02.015. Epub
2016 Feb 13.

Polyarteritis nodosa: A contemporary overview.

De Virgilio A(1), Greco A(2), Magliulo G(2), Gallo A(3), Ruoppolo G(2), Conte
M(4), Martellucci S(3), de Vincentiis M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department Organs of Sense, ENT Section, University of Rome "La Sapienza",
Viale del Policlinico 155, 00100 Roma, Italy; Department of Otolaryngology-Head
and Neck Surgery, Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, Via Elio Chianesi 53,
00144 Rome, Italy.
(2)Department Organs of Sense, ENT Section, University of Rome "La Sapienza",
Viale del Policlinico 155, 00100 Roma, Italy.
(3)Department of Medico-Surgical Sciences and Biotechnologies,
Otorhinolaryngology Section "Sapienza" University of Rome, Corso della
Repubblica, 79, 04100 Latina, (LT), Italy.
(4)Department Organs of Sense, ENT Section, University of Rome "La Sapienza",
Viale del Policlinico 155, 00100 Roma, Italy. Electronic address:
michela.conte@yahoo.it.

Comment in
    Autoimmun Rev. 2016 Dec;15(12):1202.
    Autoimmun Rev. 2016 Dec;15(12):1205.

Polyarteritis nodosa (PAN) is a systemic necrotizing vasculitis predominantly
targeting medium-sized arteries. PAN is a rare form of vasculitis, and the
precise frequency of this disease is difficult to determine. The major
environmental factor associated with PAN is HBV infection. The pathogenesis of
"idiopathic PAN" remains enigmatic, although the clinical responses to
immunosuppressive therapy support the concept that immunological mechanisms play 
an active pathogenic role. The spectrum of disease ranges from involving a single
organ to polyvisceral failure. Any organ might be affected; however, for reasons 
that are not understood, PAN does not affect the lungs. In addition to the
systemic idiopathic form, called "idiopathic generalized PAN," there are 2
clinical variants of this disease: "cutaneous PAN" and "hepatitis B virus
(HBV)-associated PAN". Diagnosis requires the integration of clinical,
angiographic, and biopsy findings. The overall prognosis of this disease has been
improved in recent decades, primarily reflecting early diagnosis and more
effective treatments. Idiopathic generalized PAN should be treated with a
combination of glucocorticoids and cyclophosphamide. The treatment of
HBV-associated PAN involves a different approach, centered on the use of an
antiviral agent to control the infection. The therapy for cutaneous PAN requires 
a less aggressive approach based on the administration of non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs over short periods of time.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2016.02.015 
PMID: 26884100  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
