

3087. Korean J Lab Med. 2009 Jun;29(3):194-8. doi: 10.3343/kjlm.2009.29.3.194.

A case of natural killer cell leukemia misdiagnosed as tuberculous
lymphadenopathy.

Lee AJ(1), Kim SG, Jeon CH, Suh HS, Yoon GS, Seo AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Catholic University Hospital of Daegu,
Nam-Gu, Daegu, Korea.

Natural killer (NK) cell neoplasms are a group of rare but highly malignant
tumors. We report here one case of NK cell leukemia. A 54-yr-old woman presented 
with a 2-month history of progressive left neck mass. Based on the positive
result of tissue PCR for Mycobacterium tuberculosis, she was at first diagnosed
with tuberculous lymphadenopathy. After two weeks, she developed generalized
lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, fever and anemia. Subsequent evaluation was 
performed including bone marrow aspiration and biopsy. Peripheral blood smear
showed leukoerythroblastic features with 31% blasts. Bone marrow was packed with 
agranular blastoid cells, which were periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) positive and
myeloperoxidase (MPO) negative. Immunophenotyping showed that these cells were
positive for CD45 and HLA-DR, whereas negative for CD3, CD5, CD7, CD10, CD13,
CD14, CD19, CD20, CD22, CD33, CD34, and CD61. Because of the absence of the
markers of T-cell, B-cell, and myeloid lineage-specific antigens, we added
CD16/56 for the immunophenotyping and the blasts were positive (94%). The tumor
cells of biopsied lymph node were only positive for CD56, consistent with NK cell
lymphoma. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) was not detected by RNA in situ hybridization.
Culture for M. tuberculosis was negative. Thus this patient was diagnosed with
blastic NK cell lymphoma/leukemia involving bone marrow and lymph node.

DOI: 10.3343/kjlm.2009.29.3.194 
PMID: 19571615  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
