

309. Antivir Ther. 2013;18(3):271-83. doi: 10.3851/IMP2612. Epub 2013 Apr 24.

Targeting human papillomavirus genome replication for antiviral drug discovery.

Archambault J(1), Melendy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montr√©al, Montreal, QC, Canada.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) infections are a major human health problem; they are 
the cause of recurrent benign warts and of several cancers of the anogenital
tract and head and neck region. Although there are two prophylactic HPV vaccines 
that could, if used universally, prevent as many as two-thirds of HPV-induced
cancers, as well as several cytotoxic and immunomodulatory agents for localized
treatment of infections, there are currently no HPV antiviral drugs in our
arsenal of therapeutic agents. This review examines the status of past and
ongoing research into the development of HPV antivirals, focused primarily upon
approaches targeting the replication of the viral genome. The only HPV enzyme,
E1, is a DNA helicase that interfaces with the cellular DNA replication machinery
to replicate the HPV genome. To date, searches for small molecule inhibitors of
E1 for use as antivirals have met with limited success. The lack of other viral
enzymes has meant that the search for antivirals has shifted to a large degree to
the modulation of protein-protein interactions. There has been some success in
identifying small molecule inhibitors targeting interactions between HPV proteins
but with activity against a small subset of viral types only. As noted in this
review, it is thought that targeting E1 interactions with cellular replication
proteins may provide inhibitors with broader activity against multiple HPV types.
Herein, we outline the steps in HPV DNA replication and discuss those that appear
to provide the most advantageous targets for the development of anti-HPV
therapeutics.

DOI: 10.3851/IMP2612 
PMCID: PMC4658057
PMID: 23615820  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
