

3090. Int J Clin Pract. 2015 Nov;69(11):1247-56. doi: 10.1111/ijcp.12707. Epub 2015 Aug
6.

Practical use of povidone-iodine antiseptic in the maintenance of oral health and
in the prevention and treatment of common oropharyngeal infections.

Kanagalingam J(1), Feliciano R(2), Hah JH(3), Labib H(4), Le TA(5), Lin JC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, NTU-Imperial College, Singapore.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, St Luke's Medical Center, Global City,
Philippines.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery and Cancer Research
Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(4)Dr. Hussein Labib Dental Clinic, Dubai, United Arab Emirates.
(5)Department of Oncology, Cho Ray hospital, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.
(6)Department of Radiation Oncology, Taichung Veterans General Hospital,
Taichung, Taiwan.

AIMS: To better inform medical practitioners on the role of antiseptics in
oropharyngeal health and disease, this article focuses on povidone-iodine
(PVP-I), an established and widely-available antiseptic agent.
METHODOLOGY: Review of the anti-infective profile, efficacy and safety of PVP-I
in managing common upper respiratory tract infections such as the common cold,
influenza and tonsillo-pharyngitis, as well as oral complications resulting from 
cancer treatment (oral mucositis), and dental conditions (periodontitis, caries).
RESULTS: Antiseptics with broad-spectrum anti-infective activity and low
resistance potential offer an attractive option in both infection control and
prevention. While there is some evidence of benefit of antiseptics in a variety
of clinical settings that include dental and oral hygiene, dermatology, oncology,
and pulmonology, there appears to be discordance between the evidence-base and
practice. This is especially apparent in the management and prevention of
oropharyngeal infections, for which the use of antiseptics varies considerably
between clinical practices, and is in marked contrast to their dermal
application, where they are extensively used as both a prophylaxis and a
treatment of skin and wound infections, thus minimising the use of antibiotics.
CONCLUSION: The link between oral and oropharyngeal health status and
susceptibility to infection has long been recognised. The high rates of
antibiotic misuse and subsequent development of bacterial resistance (e.g.
increasing vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) and methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)) in large parts of the world, especially across Asia
Pacific, highlight the need for identifying alternative antimicrobials that would
minimise the use of these medications. This, together with recent large-scale
outbreaks of, for example, avian and swine influenza virus, further underline the
importance of an increasing armamentarium for infection prevention and control.

Â© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ijcp.12707 
PMID: 26249761  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
