

3092. Med Sci Monit. 2015 Dec 28;21:4068-73.

Expression of Serum Sialic Acid, Early Antigen-IgA, and Viral Capsid Antigen-IgA 
in Nasopharynx Cancer Patients: The Diagnostic Implication of Combined Assays.

Sun Y(1), Sun C(1), Zhang E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Second Municipal Hospital 
of Weihai, Weihai, Shandong, China (mainland).

BACKGROUND Ebstein-Barr virus (EBV) plays a critical role in nasopharynx cancer, 
which can be effectively monitored by serum levels of early antigen antibody
(EA-IgA) and viral capsid antigen antibody (VCA-IgA). This study explored the
diagnostic value of combined assays of sialic acid (SA), EA-IgA, and VCA-IgA via 
the expressional assay. MATERIAL AND METHODS A total of 42 nasopharynx cancer
patients and 42 benign rhinitis and healthy controls were recruited in this
study. Serum EA-IgA and VCA-IgA were tested by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA) and enzymatic assay of serum SA. Specificity and sensitivity of those 3
assays were compared. The diagnostic value of each parameter was evaluated by ROC
curves. RESULTS All 3 indexes (SA, EA-IgA and VCA-IgA) showed elevated serum
levels in nasopharynx cancer patients when compared to those with rhinitis, who
had higher levels than healthy individuals. Concentrations of these factors were 
also positively correlated with the TNM staging of cancer. The sensitivity and
specificity were 30.95% and 83.33% (in SA), 57.14% and 95.24% (in EA-IgA), and
76.19% and 92.86% (in VCA-IgA), respectively. VCA-IgA had the highest sensitivity
among all 3 indexes. The combined assay increased the diagnostic sensitivity to
92.86% without compromising specificity. CONCLUSIONS SA, EA-IgA, and VCA-IgA
levels were significantly elevated in nasopharynx patients' serum. The combined
assay may have clinical value in diagnosis and monitoring.


PMCID: PMC4699620
PMID: 26709095  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
