

3093. Ear Nose Throat J. 2014 Aug;93(8):338-52.

A study of adherence to the AAO-HNS "Clinical Practice Guideline: Adult
Sinusitis".

Darrat I(1), Yaremchuk K, Payne S, Nelson M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Henry Ford Hospital, 2799 
W. Grand Blvd., Detroit, MI 48202, USA.

A retrospective study was conducted to determine if physicians in otolaryngology 
practice adhered to the clinical practice guideline for adult sinusitis that had 
been issued by the American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery
(AAO-HNS) 3 years earlier. We analyzed data obtained from the charts of 90 adults
who had presented to an otolaryngology outpatient department with a diagnosis of 
chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS), acute bacterial rhinosinusitis (ABRS), or acute
viral rhinosinusitis (AVRS); there were 76 cases of CRS, 11 cases of ABRS, and 3 
cases of AVRS. Our goal was to ascertain how closely the treating physician had
adhered to the AAO-HNS recommendations with respect to diagnosis, treatment, and 
prevention of these diseases. The study group was made up of 10
otolaryngologists. We evaluated 7 clinical practice metrics for CRS, 7 metrics
for ABRS, and 3 for AVRS. We found that individual physician adherence rates for 
cases of CRS ranged from 0 to 100%; average scores for the 7 metrics ranged from 
4 to 88%. For cases of ABRS, adherence scores ranged from 0 to 100%; average
scores for the 7 metrics ranged from 0 to 41%. For AVRS, the rate of adherence
for all 3 metrics was 0%. This study revealed wide variations in adherence to the
AAO-HNS guideline, but overall adherence was generally poor. Adherence appeared
to be worse for the acute types of rhinosinusitis than for chronic
rhinosinusitis. In view of these findings, a worksheet was developed that
clinicians could use to improve compliance with the guidelines.


PMID: 25181664  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
