

3095. Autoimmun Rev. 2018 Jun;17(6):567-575. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2017.12.006. Epub
2018 Apr 6.

Behçet's disease: New insights into pathophysiology, clinical features and
treatment options.

Greco A(1), De Virgilio A(2), Ralli M(3), Ciofalo A(4), Mancini P(5), Attanasio
G(6), de Vincentiis M(7), Lambiase A(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sense Organs, Sapienza University of Rome, Viale del Policlinico
155, 00100 Rome, Italy. Electronic address: antonio.greco@uniroma1.it.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Humanitas Clinical and
Research Center, via Manzoni 56, 20089 Rozzano, MI, Italy.
(3)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Sciences, Sapienza University of Rome,
Viale del Policlinico 155, 00100 Rome, Italy. Electronic address:
massimo.ralli@uniroma1.it.
(4)Department of Sense Organs, Sapienza University of Rome, Viale del Policlinico
155, 00100 Rome, Italy. Electronic address: andrea.ciofalo@uniroma1.it.
(5)Department of Sense Organs, Sapienza University of Rome, Viale del Policlinico
155, 00100 Rome, Italy. Electronic address: p.mancini@uniroma1.it.
(6)Department of Sense Organs, Sapienza University of Rome, Viale del Policlinico
155, 00100 Rome, Italy. Electronic address: giuseppe.attanasio@uniroma1.it.
(7)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Sciences, Sapienza University of Rome,
Viale del Policlinico 155, 00100 Rome, Italy. Electronic address:
marco.devincentiis@uniroma1.it.
(8)Department of Sense Organs, Sapienza University of Rome, Viale del Policlinico
155, 00100 Rome, Italy. Electronic address: alessandro.lambiase@uniroma1.it.

Behçet's disease (BD) is a rare systemic vasculitis characterized by oral
aphthous ulcers, genital ulcers, ocular lesions and other systemic
manifestations. BD occurs most frequently in Eurasian populations along the
ancient trading route known as the "Silk Road" which extends from eastern Asia to
the Mediterranean basin. The causes of BD are unknown: it is believed to be due
to an autoimmune process triggered by an infectious or environmental agent in
genetically predisposed individuals. HLA-B51 allele located in the MHC locus, on 
chromosome 6p, has been the most strongly associated risk factor for BD in areas 
along the Old Silk Route. Herpes simplex virus-1 and Streptococcus have been
postulated as possible environmental triggers of BD. T cell homeostasis
perturbation, especially Th1 and Th17 expansion and decreased regulation by Tregs
are now supposed to be the cornerstone of BD pathogenesis. The histology shows
vasculitis that involves both arteries and veins, and vessels of any size. BD is 
a systemic vasculitis with significant neutrophil infiltration, endothelial cell 
swelling, and fibrinoid necrosis. The diagnosis of BD is only supported by
clinical criteria and requires the exclusion of other diagnoses based on clinical
presentation. There are no pathognomonic laboratorial findings of BD. This rare
disease often leads to blindness and fatal systemic involvement. Main causes of
death include major vessel disease and central nervous system involvement.
Corticosteroids are commonly used to treat clinical manifestations of BD in
combination with immunosuppressant drugs. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-blocking
agents such as Infliximab, Etanercept, and Adalimumab have been reported to have 
success in patients with BD.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2017.12.006 
PMID: 29631062  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
