

3096. Am Fam Physician. 2010 Mar 1;81(5):627-34.

Common tongue conditions in primary care.

Reamy BV(1), Derby R, Bunt CW.

Author information: 
(1)Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, 4301 Jones Bridge Rd.,
Bethesda, MD 20814, USA. breamy@usuhs.mil

Although easily examined, abnormalities of the tongue can present a diagnostic
and therapeutic dilemma for physicians. Recognition and diagnosis require a
thorough history, including onset and duration, antecedent symptoms, and tobacco 
and alcohol use. Examination of tongue morphology and a careful assessment for
lymphadenopathy are also important. Geographic tongue, fissured tongue, and hairy
tongue are the most common tongue problems and do not require treatment. Median
rhomboid glossitis is usually associated with a candidal infection and responds
to topical antifungals. Atrophic glossitis is often linked to an underlying
nutritional deficiency of iron, folic acid, vitamin B12, riboflavin, or niacin
and resolves with correction of the underlying condition. Oral hairy leukoplakia,
which can be a marker for underlying immunodeficiency, is caused by the
Epstein-Barr virus and is treated with oral antivirals. Tongue growths usually
require biopsy to differentiate benign lesions (e.g., granular cell tumors,
fibromas, lymphoepithelial cysts) from premalignant leukoplakia or squamous cell 
carcinoma. Burning mouth syndrome often involves the tongue and has responded to 
treatment with alpha-lipoic acid, clonazepam, and cognitive behavior therapy in
controlled trials. Several trials have also confirmed the effectiveness of
surgical division of tongue-tie (ankyloglossia), in the context of optimizing the
success of breastfeeding compared with education alone. Tongue lesions of unclear
etiology may require biopsy or referral to an oral and maxillofacial surgeon,
head and neck surgeon, or a dentist experienced in oral pathology.


PMID: 20187599  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
