

31. Hua Xi Kou Qiang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2017 Jun 1;35(3):301-310. doi:
10.7518/hxkq.2017.03.014.

[Analysis of the current status of research on human papillomavirus-associated
head and neck cancers based on recent Chinese literature].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Yan L(1), Mingxin C(1), Jiashun W(1), Xiaolei G(1), Xinhua L(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, National Clinical Research Center for
Oral Diseases, Dept. of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, West China Hospital of
Stomatology, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the current status of research on human papillomavirus
(HPV)-associated head and neck cancers in China using national and international 
references.
METHODS: We searched for bibliographies in the electronic databases of Sichuan
University, including Chinese Biological and Medical Database (CBM), China
Science and Technology Journal Database (VIP), and Wanfang Journal Database.
Then, data was selected and extracted to analyze the basic characteristics of
HPV-related head and neck cancers, the general prevalence of HPV, and the effects
of various clinic pathological indicators on HPV patients.
RESULTS: The general prevalence of HPV was 34.05% among civil patients with head 
and neck cancers. Our analysis of different clinical and pathological indices
that affect HPV-associated oral squamous cell carcinomas revealed that
non-smoking and non-drinking groups had higher HPV infection rates compared with 
smoking (P=0.002) and drinking (P< 0.005) groups. In addition, N2-N3 stage
patients had higher detectable rates than N0-N1 stage patients (P=0.027).
CONCLUSIONS: The majority of civil research studies on HPV-associated head and
neck cancers are concentrated on clinical studies. Thus, the molecular
neuropathology and signaling pathway of HPV should be further explored in the
future to advance prognostic methods. Moreover, the perspective view of
therapeutic vaccines and molecular-targeting treatments should receive close
attention.  .

Publisher: 目的 基于目前国内人乳头瘤病毒（HPV）相关的头颈肿瘤的文献，结合国外文献研究，分析目前我国在此领域的研究现状。方法
计算机检索四川大学图书馆电子期刊数据库，包括中国生物医学文献数据库（CBM）、维普中文科技期刊数据库（VIP）和万方期刊全文数据库，筛选并提取数据，分析国内与HP
V相关的头颈肿瘤研究的基本特征、HPV总检出率以及不同临床病理指标对HPV感染的影响。结果
国内头颈肿瘤患者中，HPV总检出率为34.05%。在分析不同临床病理指标对口腔鳞癌患者HPV感染的影响时，不吸烟组、不饮酒组的HPV感染率高于吸烟组（P=0.00
2）、饮酒组（P<0.005）；N2~N3期的HPV检出率高于N0~N1期（P=0.027）。结论
HPV相关头颈肿瘤的中文文献多数以临床研究为主，未来应继续研究致病的分子病理机制以及预后的分子信号通路，更多关注具有前瞻视角的治疗型HPV疫苗和分子靶向的研究。.
DOI: 10.7518/hxkq.2017.03.014 
PMID: 28675017  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
