

3100. J Pathol. 2013 Nov;231(3):311-22. doi: 10.1002/path.4239. Epub 2013 Sep 3.

Constitutive activation of distinct NF-κB signals in EBV-associated
nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Chung GT(1), Lou WP, Chow C, To KF, Choy KW, Leung AW, Tong CY, Yuen JW, Ko CW,
Yip TT, Busson P, Lo KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, State Key Laboratory in
Oncology in South China, Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong; Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Science, Prince of Wales
Hospital, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.

As a distinct type of head and neck cancer, non-keratinizing nasopharyngeal
carcinoma (NPC) is closely associated with EBV infection and massive lymphoid
infiltration. The unique histological features suggest that local inflammation
plays an important role in NPC tumourigenesis. We comprehensively characterized
NF-κB signalling, a key inflammatory pathway which might contribute to the
tumourigenesis of this EBV-associated cancer. By EMSA, western blotting, and
immunohistochemical staining, constitutive activation of distinct NF-κB
complexes, either p50/p50/Bcl3 or p50/RelB, was found in almost all EBV-positive 
NPC tumours. siRNA or chemical inhibition of NF-κB signalling significantly
inhibited the growth of EBV-positive NPC cells C666-1. Gene expression profiling 
identified a number of NF-κB target genes involved in cell proliferation,
apoptosis, immune response, and transcription. We further confirmed that p50
signals modulate the expression of multiple oncogenes (MYB, BCL2), chemokines,
and chemokine receptors (CXCL9, CXCL10, CX3CL1, and CCL20). The findings support 
a crucial role of these constitutively activated NF-κB signals in NPC
tumourigenesis and local inflammation. In addition to expression of the viral
oncoprotein LMP1, genetic alteration of several NF-κB regulators (eg TRAF3,
TRAF2, NFKBIA, A20) also contributes to the aberrant NF-κB activation in
EBV-associated NPC. Except for LMP1-expressing C15 cells, all NPC tumour lines
harbour at least one of these genetic alterations. Importantly, missense
mutations of TRAF3, TRAF2, and A20 were also detected in 3/33 (9.1%) primary
tumours. Taken together with the reported LTBR amplification in 7.3% of primary
NPCs, genetic alterations in NF-κB pathways occurred in at least 16% of cases of 
this cancer. The findings indicate that distinct NF-κB signals are constitutively
activated in EBV-positive NPC cells by either multiple genetic changes or EBV
latent genes.

Copyright © 2013 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/path.4239 
PMID: 23868181  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
