

3102. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2010 Feb;48(2):95-9.

[Clinical characteristics and antimicrobial resistance of invasive pneumococcal
disease in children].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu SY(1), Dong L, Yang JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Yuying Children's Hospital Affiliated to
Wenzhou Medical College, Wenzhou 325027, China.

OBJECTIVE: Streptococcus pneumoniae (SP) is a major causative agent of
community-acquired pneumonia. In children older than 2 months, SP is also the
most common cause of invasive bacterial infections. Invasive pneumococcal
diseases (IPD) have become a severe problem of public health worldwide. The aim
of this study was to summarize the clinical characteristics and antimicrobial
resistance of IPD in children, and to raise the level of diagnosis and treatment 
of this disease.
METHOD: The clinical data from 55 cases of IPD younger than 12 years old seen
from January 2004 to June 2009 in Yuying Children's Hospital Affiliated to
Wenzhou Medical College were analyzed retrospectively. Blood, cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF), seroperitoneum, mediastinum and soft tissue aspirate specimens were
collected from these children, and 64 SP strains were cultured, isolated and
confirmed and the antibiotics susceptibility to penicillin and other antibiotics 
of these strains were assessed.
RESULT: The 55 cases of IPD were identified, among whom 32 were male and 23
female, the ratio was 1.39. The ages ranged from 47 days to 12 years. Most (62%) 
of the cases were aged less than 2 years, and 16% were aged from 2 to 5 years.
Overall, 38 (69%) had septicemia, of whom 8 cases were complicated with
meningitis, 2 with pneumonia complicated with empyema, 1 had pneumonia
complicated with mediastinal abscess and 11 with pneumonia. Nine cases (16%) were
diagnosed as meningitis. Seven cases (13%) had hip or neck abscess and 1 case had
purulent peritonitis. Thirteen cases (24%) had an underlying disease, including
mainly leukemia (31%), followed by congenital heart disease (23%) and head trauma
(15%). Three cases (5%) had received a surgical operation; 3 cases (5%) had
combined virus infections and 2 cases (4%) had mycoplasma infection. Most (73%)
episodes occurred in winter and spring. The main origin of infection was
community (89%). Forty of the patients were cured, 12 improved and 3 died (5%).
Nine cases (16%) developed neurologic complications. There was a statistically
significant differences in the annual detection rate of invasive SP (chi(2) =
33.93, P < 0.01). The incidence of penicillin-intermediate S. pneumoniae (PISP)
and penicillin-resistant S. pneumoniae (PRSP) were 30% and 41%, respectively; the
resistance to erythromycin and lincomycin were found in as high as 94% and 88% of
isolates, respectively; while the resistant rate to chloramphenicol and
cefotaxime were low, 26% and 22%, respectively. The multidrug resistance rate was
89%.
CONCLUSION: Children aged less than 5 years, especially younger than 2 years are 
prone to IPD and the underlying diseases are found in 24% of cases; septicemia
and meningitis are the common diseases.


PMID: 20426931  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
