

3104. CA Cancer J Clin. 2012 Nov-Dec;62(6):400-22. doi: 10.3322/caac.21157. Epub 2012
Sep 12.

Oral complications of cancer and cancer therapy: from cancer treatment to
survivorship.

Epstein JB(1), Thariat J, Bensadoun RJ, Barasch A, Murphy BA, Kolnick L,
Popplewell L, Maghami E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, City of Hope, Duarte,
CA, USA. jepstein@coh.org

Answer questions and earn CME/CNE Oral complications resulting from cancer and
cancer therapies cause acute and late toxicities that may be underreported,
underrecognized, and undertreated. Recent advances in cancer treatment have led
to changes in the incidence, nature, and severity of oral complications. As the
number of survivors increases, it is becoming increasingly recognized that the
aggressive management of oral toxicities is needed to ensure optimal long-term
oral health and general well-being. Advances in care have had an impact on
previously recognized oral complications and are leading to newly recognized
adverse effects. Here, the authors briefly review advances in cancer therapy,
including recent advances in surgery, oral care, radiation therapy, hematopoietic
cell transplantation, and medical oncology; describe how these advances affect
oral health; and discuss the frequent and/or severe oral health complications
associated with cancer and cancer treatment and their effect upon long-term
health. Although some of the acute oral toxicities of cancer therapies may be
reduced, they remain essentially unavoidable. The significant impact of long-term
complications requires increased awareness and recognition to promote prevention 
and appropriate intervention. It is therefore important for the primary
oncologist to be aware of these complications so that appropriate measures can be
implemented in a timely manner. Prevention and management is best provided via
multidisciplinary health care teams, which must be integrated and communicate
effectively in order to provide the best patient care in a coordinated manner at 
the appropriate time.

Copyright Â© 2012 American Cancer Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.3322/caac.21157 
PMID: 22972543  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
