

3113. Breast Cancer Res. 2015 Jan 21;17:8. doi: 10.1186/s13058-014-0498-3.

Molecular mechanism and clinical impact of APOBEC3B-catalyzed mutagenesis in
breast cancer.

Harris RS.

Cancer genomic DNA sequences enable identification of all mutations and suggest
targets for precision medicine. The identities and patterns of the mutations
themselves also provide critical information for deducing the originating DNA
damaging agents, causal molecular mechanisms, and thus additional therapeutic
targets. A classic example is ultraviolet light, which crosslinks adjacent
pyrimidines and leads to C-to-T transitions. A new example is the DNA cytosine
deaminase APOBEC3B, which was identified recently as a source of DNA damage and
mutagenesis in breast, head/neck, cervix, bladder, lung, ovary, and to lesser
extents additional cancer types. This enzyme is normally an effector protein in
the innate immune response to virus infection but upregulation in these cancer
types causes elevated levels of genomic C-to-U deamination events, which manifest
as C-to-T transitions and C-to-G transversions within distinct DNA trinucleotide 
contexts (preferentially 5'-TCA and 5'-TCG). Genomic C-to-U deamination events
within the same trinucleotide contexts also lead to cytosine mutation clusters
(kataegis), and may precipitate visible chromosomal aberrations such as
translocations. Clinical studies indicate that APOBEC3B upregulation correlates
with poorer outcomes for estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer patients,
including shorter durations of disease-free survival and overall survival after
surgery. APOBEC3B may therefore have both diagnostic and prognostic potential.
APOBEC3B may also be a candidate for therapeutic targeting because inhibition of 
this non-essential enzyme is predicted to decrease tumor mutation rates and
diminish the likelihood of undesirable mutation-dependent outcomes such as
recurrence, metastasis, and the development of therapy resistant tumors.

DOI: 10.1186/s13058-014-0498-3 
PMCID: PMC4303225
PMID: 25848704  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
