

3119. Cancer Immunol Res. 2017 May;5(5):408-416. doi: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-16-0333.
Epub 2017 Apr 13.

Increased PD-1+ and TIM-3+ TILs during Cetuximab Therapy Inversely Correlate with
Response in Head and Neck Cancer Patients.

Jie HB(1), Srivastava RM(1), Argiris A(2), Bauman JE(3), Kane LP(4), Ferris
RL(5)(4)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania.
(2)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, UT Health Science
Center at San Antonio, Cancer Therapy & Research Center, San Antonio, Texas.
(3)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(4)Department of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(5)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania. ferrisrl@upmc.edu.
(6)Cancer Immunology Program, University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

Despite emerging appreciation for the important role of immune checkpoint
receptors in regulating the effector functions of T cells, it is unknown whether 
their expression is involved in determining the clinical outcome in response to
cetuximab therapy. We examined the expression patterns of immune checkpoint
receptors (including PD-1, CTLA-4, and TIM-3) and cytolytic molecules (including 
granzyme B and perforin) of CD8+ tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) and
compared them with those of peripheral blood T lymphocytes (PBL) in patients with
head and neck cancer (HNSCC) during cetuximab therapy. The frequency of PD-1 and 
TIM-3 expression was significantly increased in CD8+ TILs compared with CD8+ PBLs
(P = 0.008 and P = 0.02, respectively). This increased CD8+ TIL population
coexpressed granzyme B/perforin and PD-1/TIM-3, which suggests a regulatory role 
for these immune checkpoint receptors in cetuximab-promoting cytolytic activities
of CD8+ TILs. Indeed, the increased frequency of PD-1+ and TIM-3+ CD8+ TILs was
inversely correlated with clinical outcome of cetuximab therapy. These findings
support the use of PD-1 and TIM-3 as biomarkers to reflect immune status of CD8+ 
T cells in the tumor microenvironment during cetuximab therapy. Blockade of these
immune checkpoint receptors might enhance cetuximab-based cancer immunotherapy to
reverse CD8+ TIL dysfunction, thus potentially improving clinical outcomes of
HNSCC patients. Cancer Immunol Res; 5(5); 408-16. ©2017 AACR.

©2017 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-16-0333 
PMCID: PMC5497750
PMID: 28408386  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
