

312. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016 Mar 11;65(9):248-9. doi: 10.15585/mmwr.mm6509a4.

Notes from the Field: Lymphocytic Choriomeningitis Virus Meningoencephalitis from
a Household Rodent Infestation - Minnesota, 2015.

Talley P, Holzbauer S, Smith K, Pomputius W.

Erratum in
    MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016;65(11):295.

On April 20, 2015, a female aged 15 years sought care at her pediatrician's
office after 5 days of fever, myalgia, left parietal headache, and photophobia. A
rapid influenza assay was negative, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate and total 
white blood cell count were normal. She improved with symptomatic care at home,
but returned to her pediatrician's office on April 28, reporting recurrence of
her headache and photophobia and new onset of a stiff neck. She was admitted to
the hospital, where she was febrile to 102.9°F (39.4°C) and had meningismus.
Computed tomography scan of her head was normal, and a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
analysis showed a markedly elevated white blood cell count with 68% lymphocytes, 
low glucose, and a negative Gram stain. She was treated empirically for both
bacterial and herpes simplex virus meningitis. The patient's hospital course was 
notable for hypotension (blood pressure 81/50), irritability, and pancreatitis
with a peak lipase of 8,627 U/L. CSF cultures yielded no growth, and CSF
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing for herpes simplex virus was negative.
Nucleic acid amplification testing, acid-fast bacilli stain, and acid-fast
bacilli cultures of CSF were negative for Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Results of 
investigations for human immunodeficiency virus, syphilis, Lyme disease, human
herpesvirus 6 and 7, and species of Babesia, Toxoplasma, Histoplasma,
Cryptococcus, Blastomyces, and Brucella were negative. She recovered and was
discharged on hospital day 11 with no apparent sequelae.

DOI: 10.15585/mmwr.mm6509a4 
PMID: 26963688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
