

3122. Lin Chung Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2018 Jul;32(13):963-968. doi:
10.13201/j.issn.1001-1781.2018.13.001.

[Synthesis of cell penetrating peptide decorated magnetic nanoparticles loading
cisplatin for nasopharyngeal cancer therapy].

[Article in Chinese]

Quan LM(1), Zhong Y, Weng HH.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Zhujiang Hospital,
Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, 510000,China.

Objective:To synthesize cisplatin loaded and cell penetrating peptide TAT
decorated magnetic nanoparticles and to observe the inhibiting effect in vitro on
nasopharyngeal cancer therapy.Method：The aldehyde sodium alginate coated magnetic
nanoparticles (ASA-MNPs) was prepared as the drug delivery system, which was
covalently attached by PEGylation TAT (TAT-ASA-MNPs) via condensation of aldehyde
with amino group and then coordinated with cisplatin (TAT-ASA-MNPs@CDDP). The
complex was characterized by H-NMR and FT-IR. The cell penetrating ability and
biocompatibility were observed by means of fluorescent tags. The inhibited effect
on nasopharyngeal cancer CNE-2 cells was measured by cellular toxicity research
and flow cytometry.Result：The H NMR and FT-IR of TAT-ASA-MNPs exhibited the
characteristic peaks of TAT, PEG as well as ASA. The dynamic light scattering
showed the hydrodynamic diameter of the complex was（145.9±1.5）nm. Zeta potential 
was（-21.66±1.24）mV and the drug loading rate was（25.03±3.05）%. Fluorescent
labeling assay revealed that FITC marked TATASAMNPs was quickly taken up by
CNE-2 cells. Cytotoxicity experiment on 293T cells displayed high survival rate
(>70%) after cultured for 72h. Negative hemagglutination reflected decent
biocompatibility. In vitro cytotoxicity test and cell apoptosis assay exhibited
obvious inhibition on CNE-2 cell with TATASAMNPs@CDDP at low concentration of
cisplatin compared to ASA-MNPs@CDDP (P<0.05).Conclusion：TAT-ASA-MNPs showed
decent biocompatibility while distinctly inhibit CNE-2 cells in vitro study.

Copyright© by the Editorial Department of Journal of Clinical Otorhinolaryngology
Head and Neck Surgery.

DOI: 10.13201/j.issn.1001-1781.2018.13.001 
PMID: 29986554  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
