

3124. Mod Rheumatol. 2013 Mar;23(2):397-400. doi: 10.1007/s10165-012-0670-5. Epub 2012 
Jun 6.

Subacute thyroiditis in a patient with juvenile idiopathic arthritis undergoing
etanercept treatment: a case report and review of the literature.

Yasuji I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Pediatrics, Nihon University Nerima-Hikarigaoka
Hospital, Nihon University of School Medicine, 2-11-1, Hikarigaoka, Nerima-ku,
Tokyo, Japan 179-0072. y-inamo@pb3.so-net.ne.jp

We report on a 24-year-old woman with juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) who
developed subacute thyroiditis (SAT) while being treated with etanercept. She had
suffered from JIA for 12 years, and her arthritis proved refractory to treatment 
with ibuprofen, prednisolone, and methotrexate. For the past 5 years, the patient
had been treated successfully with etanercept at 25 mg/week. The patient more
recently complained of high fever and lassitude, and presented with anterior neck
swelling and tenderness. Palpation of the thyroid gland revealed it to be warm,
erythematous, tender, and diffusely swollen. Laboratory tests revealed an
increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein level. Thyroid
function tests revealed decreased levels of thyrotropin-stimulating hormone,
increased levels of free triiodothyronine, free thyroxine, and thyroglobulin, and
an absence of thyroid autoantibodies. Sonography showed a diffusely reduced
predominantly hypoechoic thyroid gland. Unenhanced computed tomography of the
neck showed a homogeneously and mildly reduced thyroid gland. Serum titers of
several viruses were not significant and so were considered unlikely to be the
pathogens. On the basis of these presented findings, we diagnosed SAT, and
etanercept therapy was withdrawn. The patient was treated with antibiotics and an
increased prednisolone dose was initiated. She became symptom free and showed
improved laboratory test results within 2 weeks, and was euthyroid by 3 months.
Three months later, the patient developed hypothyroidism, although 6 months
further on, the patient was asymptomatic on prednisolone, methotrexate, and
levothyroxine therapy. In conclusion, whether SAT is a specific adverse event in 
this case in response to etanercept remains unclear. Nevertheless, the
possibility of SAT should be considered in such patients on etanercept treatment.

DOI: 10.1007/s10165-012-0670-5 
PMID: 22669598  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
