

3128. Apoptosis. 2012 Aug;17(8):762-76. doi: 10.1007/s10495-012-0720-7.

Apoptin induces apoptosis by changing the equilibrium between the stability of
TAp73 and ΔNp73 isoforms through ubiquitin ligase PIR2.

Taebunpakul P(1), Sayan BS, Flinterman M, Klanrit P, Gäken J, Odell EW, Melino G,
Tavassoli M.

Author information: 
(1)Head and Neck Oncology Group, King's College London Dental Institute, Floor 28
Tower Wing, Guy's Hospital Campus, London, SE1 9RT, UK.

Apoptin, a protein derived from the chicken anaemia virus, induces cell death in 
various cancer cells but shows little or no cytotoxicity in normal cells. The
mechanism of apoptin-induced cell death is currently unknown but it appears to
induce apoptosis independent of p53 status. Here we show that p73, a p53 family
member, is important in apoptin-induced apoptosis. In p53 deficient and/or
mutated cells, apoptin induced the expression of TAp73 leading to the induction
of apoptosis. Knockdown of p73 using siRNA resulted in a significant reduction in
apoptin-induced cytotoxicity. The p53 and p73 pro-apoptotic target PUMA plays an 
important role in apoptin-induced cell death as knockdown of PUMA significantly
reduced cell sensitivity to apoptin. Importantly, apoptin expression resulted in 
a marked increase in TAp73 protein stability. Investigation into the mechanisms
of TAp73 stability showed that apoptin induced the expression of the ring finger 
domain ubiquitin ligase PIR2 which is involved in the degradation of the
anti-apoptotic ∆Np73 isoform. Collectively, our results suggest a novel mechanism
of apoptin-induced apoptosis through increased TAp73 stability and induction of
PIR2 resulting in the degradation of ∆Np73 and activation of pro-apoptotic
targets such as PUMA causing cancer cell death.

DOI: 10.1007/s10495-012-0720-7 
PMID: 22484480  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
