

3130. Br J Haematol. 2013 Feb;160(3):331-42. doi: 10.1111/bjh.12136. Epub 2012 Dec 4.

Expression of CD70 in nasal natural killer/T cell lymphoma cell lines and
patients; its role for cell proliferation through binding to soluble CD27.

Yoshino K(1), Kishibe K, Nagato T, Ueda S, Komabayashi Y, Takahara M, Harabuchi
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Asahikawa Medical College,
Asahikawa, Japan.

Nasal natural killer (NK)/T cell lymphoma (NNKTL) is associated with Epstein-Barr
virus (EBV). The present study analysed gene expression patterns of the NNKTL
cell lines SNK6, SNK1 and SNT8, which are positive for EBV and latent membrane
protein (LMP)-1, using a complementary DNA array analysis. We found that CD70 was
specifically expressed in SNK6 and SNT8. Reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction and flow cytometric analyses confirmed that CD70 was expressed in all 3 
NNKTL cell lines, but not in the other EBV-positive NK-cell lines. In vitro
studies showed that NNKTL cell lines proliferated, in a dose-dependent fashion,
in response to exogenous soluble CD27, which is the ligand for CD70. In NNKTL
patients, we confirmed that the CD70 was expressed on the lymphoma cells in NNKTL
tissues and that soluble CD27 was present in sera at higher levels as compared to
healthy individuals. Finally, complement-dependent cytotoxicity assay showed that
anti-CD70 antibody mediated effective complement-dependent killing of NNKTL cells
and the affected target CD70 expression on the cells. These results suggest that 
CD70 acts as a functional receptor binding to soluble CD27, resulting in lymphoma
progression and that immunotherapy using anti-CD70 antibody may be a potential
candidate for treatment for NNKTL.

Â© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/bjh.12136 
PMID: 23206232  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
