

3131. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2015 Jun;64(6):697-705. doi:
10.1007/s00262-015-1675-7. Epub 2015 Mar 10.

CCL17 and CCL22/CCR4 signaling is a strong candidate for novel targeted therapy
against nasal natural killer/T-cell lymphoma.

Kumai T(1), Nagato T, Kobayashi H, Komabayashi Y, Ueda S, Kishibe K, Ohkuri T,
Takahara M, Celis E, Harabuchi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Asahikawa Medical
University, Midorigaoka-Higashi 2-1-1-1, Asahikawa, 078-8510, Japan.

Nasal natural killer/T-cell lymphoma (NNKTL) is associated with Epstein-Barr
virus and has a poor prognosis because of local invasion and/or multiple
dissemination. Various chemokines play a role in tumor proliferation and
invasion, and chemokine receptors including the C-C chemokine receptor 4 (CCR4)
are recognized as potential targets for treating hematologic malignancies. The
aim of the present study was to determine whether specific chemokines are
produced by NNKTL. We compared chemokine expression patterns in culture
supernatants of NNKTL cell lines with those of other lymphoma or leukemia cell
lines using chemokine protein array and ELISA. Chemokine (C-C motif) ligand (CCL)
17 and CCL22 were highly produced by NNKTL cell lines as compared to the other
cell lines. In addition, CCL17 and CCL22 were readily observed in the sera of
NNKTL patients. The levels of these chemokines were significantly higher in
patients than in healthy controls. Furthermore, we detected the expression of
CCR4 (the receptor for CCL17 and CCL22) on the surface of NNKTL cell lines and in
tissues of NNKTL patients. Anti-CCR4 monoclonal antibody (mAb) efficiently
induced antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity mediated by natural killer cells
against NNKTL cell lines. Our results suggest that CCL17 and CCL22 may be
important factors in the development of NNKTL and open up the possibility of
immunotherapy of this lymphoma using anti-CCR4 mAb.

DOI: 10.1007/s00262-015-1675-7 
PMCID: PMC4648286
PMID: 25754123  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
