

3139. J Infect Chemother. 2013 Aug;19(4):757-60. doi: 10.1007/s10156-012-0493-5. Epub
2012 Oct 11.

Two cases of partial dominant interferon-γ receptor 1 deficiency that presented
with different clinical courses of bacille Calmette-Guérin multiple
osteomyelitis.

Obinata K(1), Lee T, Niizuma T, Kinoshita K, Shimizu T, Hoshina T, Sasaki Y, Hara
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Koshigaya Municipal Hospital, Saitama, Japan.
obinata@juntendo-urayasu.jp

We experienced two cases of unrelated Japanese children with bacille
Calmette-Guérin (BCG) multiple osteomyelitis with partial interferon (IFN)-γ
receptor 1 (IFNGR1) deficiency. Heterozygous small deletions with frame shift
(811 del4 and 818 del4) were detected, which were consistent with the diagnosis
of partial dominant IFNGR1 deficiency. Case 1: a 2-year-old boy visited us
because of limb and neck pain. He had been vaccinated with BCG at 17 months of
age. Multiple destructive lesions were observed in the skull, ribs, femur, and
vertebral bones. Mycobacterium bovis (BCG Tokyo 172 strain by RFLP technique) was
detected in the bone specimen. The BCG multiple osteomyelitis was treated
successfully without recurrence. Case 2: an 18-month-old girl developed multiple 
osteomyelitis 9 months after BCG inoculation. Radiologic images showed multiple
osteolytic lesions in the skull, ribs, femur, and vertebrae. M. bovis (BCG Tokyo 
172 strain) was detected in the cultures from a bone biopsy. Her clinical course 
showed recurrent osteomyelitis and lymphadenitis with no pulmonary involvement.
The effects of high-dose antimycobacterial drugs and IFN-γ administration were
transient, and complete remission has since been achieved by combination
antimycobacterial therapy, including levofloxacin. Partial dominant IFNGR1
deficiency is a rare disorder, but it should be considered when a patient
presents with multiple osteomyelitis after BCG vaccination. The cases that are
resistant to conventional regimens require additional second-line antituberculous
drugs, such as levofloxacin.

DOI: 10.1007/s10156-012-0493-5 
PMID: 23053508  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
