

3140. Acta Otolaryngol. 2012 Sep;132(9):974-80. doi: 10.3109/00016489.2012.663933. Epub
2012 Jul 25.

Intranasal trigeminal chemosensitivity in patients with postviral and
post-traumatic olfactory dysfunction.

Ren Y(1), Yang L, Guo Y, Xutao M, Li K, Wei Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head & Neck Surgery, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital,
Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.

CONCLUSIONS: The olfactory and intranasal trigeminal systems are closely
connected. With regard to intranasal trigeminal event-related potential (ERP),
patients with olfactory dysfunction (OD) showed longer latency and lower
amplitude, which indicated decreased trigeminal sensitivity. Different age,
etiology, and olfactory status also affect trigeminal sensitivity differently.
OBJECTIVE: OD is a common symptom in the rhinology clinic. ERP is considered an
important method to evaluate chemosensitivity. The aim of this study was to
investigate changes of intranasal trigeminal sense in patients with postviral OD 
(PVOD) and post-traumatic OD (PTOD).
METHODS: A total of 96 participants (30 healthy adults and 66 patients with OD)
aged 20-65 years were investigated. The T&T olfactometer, the Sniffin' Sticks
olfactory test, and trigeminal ERPs (tERPs) were used. We evaluated trigeminal
sensitivity influenced by different factors (age, etiology, and olfactory status)
in healthy subjects with normal olfactory function and in patients with PVOD and 
PTOD.
RESULTS: Patients with OD showed higher trigeminal thresholds than normal
controls. Compared with controls, N1/P2 latencies of tERPs increased and
amplitudes decreased in patients with OD. Older subjects showed longer latencies 
and lower amplitudes than young subjects in both controls and the OD group.
Patients with PTOD exhibited worse psychophysical olfactory function and
decreased trigeminal sensitivity.

DOI: 10.3109/00016489.2012.663933 
PMID: 22830564  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
