

3142. Am J Hematol. 2014 Jan;89(1):25-33. doi: 10.1002/ajh.23570. Epub 2013 Sep 30.

Downregulation of miR-15a due to LMP1 promotes cell proliferation and predicts
poor prognosis in nasal NK/T-cell lymphoma.

Komabayashi Y(1), Kishibe K, Nagato T, Ueda S, Takahara M, Harabuchi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Asahikawa Medical
University, Asahikawa, Midorigaoka-higashi 2-1-1-1, Asahikawa, Japan.

Nasal NK/T-cell lymphoma (NNKTL) is an Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated
malignancy and has distinct clinical and histological features. However, its
genetic features are hitherto unclear. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play a crucial role in 
the pathogenesis of several malignancies via regulating gene expression. In this 
study, we investigated whether the specific microRNAs were related to the tumor
behaviors in NNKTL. MiRNA array and Quantitative RT-PCR analyses revealed that
miR-15a was expressed at a much lower level in NNKTL cells (SNK-1, SNK-6, and
SNT-8) than in normal peripheral NK cells and EBV-negative NK cell line KHYG-1.
Quantitative PCR and western blot analyses showed that the expression of MYB and 
cyclin D1, which are validated targets of miR-15a, was higher in NNKTL cells.
Transfection of NNKTL cells (SNK-6 and SNT-8) with a miR-15a precursor decreased 
MYB and cyclin D1 levels, thereby blocking G1/S transition and cell
proliferation. Knockdown of EBV-encoded latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1)
significantly increased miR-15a expression in SNK-6 cells. In NNKTL tissues, we
found that reduced miR-15a expression, which correlated with MYB and cyclin D1
expression, was associated with poor prognosis of NNKTL patients. These data
suggest that downregulation of miR-15a, possibly due to LMP1, implicates in the
pathogenesis of NNKTL by inducing cell proliferation via MYB and cyclin D1. Thus,
miR-15a could be a potential target for antitumor therapy and a prognostic
predictor for NNKTL.

Copyright Â© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajh.23570 
PMID: 23963825  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
