

3143. Indian J Pediatr. 2009 Nov;76(11):1109-11. doi: 10.1007/s12098-009-0233-8.

Clinical and etiological profile of acute febrile encephalopathy in eastern
Nepal.

Singh RR(1), Chaudhary SK, Bhatta NK, Khanal B, Shah D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine and 1Microbiology, B.P.
Koirala Institute of Health Sciences, Dharan, Nepal.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the clinical and etiological profile of acute febrile
encephalopathy in children presenting to a tertiary care referral center of
Eastern Nepal.
METHODS: 107 children (aged 1 month to 14 yrs) presenting to the emergency with
fever (> 38 C) of less than 2 weeks duration with altered sensorium with/or
without seizure were prospectively investigated for etiological cause. The
investigations included blood and CSF counts, blood and CSF cultures, peripheral 
smear and serology for malarial parasite, and serology for Japanese encephalitis 
(JE) virus. Other investigations included EEG and CT or MRI wherever indicated.
RESULTS: The most common presenting complaints apart from fever and altered
sensorium were headache and vomiting. Convulsions, neck rigidity, hypertonia,
brisk deep tendon reflexes, extensor plantar response and focal neurological
deficits were seen in 50%, 57%, 22.4%, 28%, 39.3% and 9.3% of the subjects,
respectively. The diagnoses based on clinical presentation and laboratory
findings were pyogenic meningitis in 45 (42%), non JE viral encephalitis in 26
(25%), JE in 19 (18%), cerebral malaria in 8 (7%), herpes encephalitis and
tubercular meningitis in 4 (4%) each, and typhoid encephalopathy in 1 case.
CONCLUSION: Pyogenic meningitis and viral encephalitis including JE are the most 
common causes of acute presentation with fever and encephalopathy. Preventive
strategies must be directed keeping these causes in mind.

DOI: 10.1007/s12098-009-0233-8 
PMID: 20012797  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
