

3148. Lin Chung Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2017 Oct
20;31(20):1585-1588;1592. doi: 10.13201/j.issn.1001-1781.2017.20.010.

[Clinical treatment effect of glucocorticoids and extract of ginkgo biloba on
post-viral olfactory dysfunction].

[Article in Chinese]

Guo YC(1), Yao LY(1), Wei YX(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Beijing Anzhen Hospital,
Capital Medicine University, Beijing, 100029, China.

Objective:To observe the effect of ginkgo biloba extraction combined with
glucocorticoids on postviral olfactory dysfunction.Method:Forty-two patients were
diagnosed as postviral olfactory dysfunction. All patients underwent olfactory
test, including T&T test and Sniffin Sticks test before and after treatment. The 
treatment lasted up to 3 months based on effectiveness. The results of olfactory 
test were recorded every month.Result:Twenty patients received the treatment with
prednisone acetate. T&T test showed that the effective and improvement rate of
the treatment with prednisone acetate were 25.00%(5/20) and
45.00%(9/20),respectively; Sniffin Sticks test showed that the effective and
improvement rate of the treatment were 20.00%(4/20)and
50.00%(10/20),respectively. Twenty-two patients received the treatment combined
with extract of ginkgo biloba. T&T test showed that the effective and improvement
rate of the treatment with prednisone acetate were 31.82%(7/22)and
50.00%(11/22),respectively; through Sniffin Sticks test showed that the effective
and improvement rate of the treatment were 27.27%(6/22)and
54.55%(12/22),respectively.Conclusion:Olfactory function in patients with
postviral olfactory dysfunction was improved with two therapy. There was no
significant difference on effect between the two therapeutic groups, but the
effect of combination of extract of ginkgo biloba was better than the effect of
prednisone acetate. Prolong duration of treatment is help for the recovery of the
olfaction.

CopyrightÂ© by the Editorial Department of Journal of Clinical Otorhinolaryngology
Head and Neck Surgery.

DOI: 10.13201/j.issn.1001-1781.2017.20.010 
PMID: 29797955  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
