

3151. Am J Surg Pathol. 2017 Apr;41(4):458-471. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000797.

SMARCB1 (INI-1)-deficient Sinonasal Carcinoma: A Series of 39 Cases Expanding the
Morphologic and Clinicopathologic Spectrum of a Recently Described Entity.

Agaimy A(1), Hartmann A, Antonescu CR, Chiosea SI, El-Mofty SK, Geddert H, Iro H,
Lewis JS Jr, Märkl B, Mills SE, Riener MO, Robertson T, Sandison A, Semrau S,
Simpson RH, Stelow E, Westra WH, Bishop JA.

Author information: 
(1)*Institute of Pathology Departments of ¶Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck
Surgery ¶¶Radiation Therapy, University Hospital of Erlangen, Erlangen ∥Institute
of Pathology, St Vincent's Hospital, Karlsruhe **Institute of Pathology, Klinikum
Augsburg, Augsburg ‡‡Pathology Laboratory, Frankfurt am Main, Germany †Department
of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY ‡Department of
Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Presbyterian Hospital,
Pittsburgh, PA §Division of Anatomic and Molecular Pathology, Washington
University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO #Department of Pathology,
Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN
††Department of Pathology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA
§§Department of Neuropathology, Pathology Queensland, Royal Brisbane Hospitals
Campus, Herston, Qld, Australia ∥∥Department of Histopathology, Charing Cross
Hospital & Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, UK ##Department of
Anatomical Pathology, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada ***Departments
of Pathology, Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, and Oncology, The Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD.

To more fully characterize the clinical and pathologic spectrum of a recently
described tumor entity of the sinonasal tract characterized by loss of nuclear
expression of SMARCB1 (INI1), we analyzed 39 SMARCB1-deficient sinonasal
carcinomas collected from multiple medical centers. The tumors affected 23 males 
and 16 females with an age range of 19 to 89 years (median, 52). All patients
presented with locally advanced disease (T3, n=5; T4, n=27) involving the sinuses
(mainly ethmoid) with variable involvement of the nasal cavity. Thirty patients
received surgery and/or radiochemotherapy with curative intent. At last
follow-up, 56% of patients died of disease 0 to 102 months after diagnosis
(median, 15), 2 were alive with disease, and 1 died of an unrelated cause. Only 9
patients (30%) were alive without disease at last follow-up (range, 11 to 115 mo;
median, 26). The original diagnosis of retrospectively identified cases was most 
often sinonasal undifferentiated carcinoma (n=14) and nonkeratinizing/basaloid
squamous cell carcinoma (n=5). Histologically, most tumors displayed either a
predominantly basaloid (61%) or plasmacytoid/rhabdoid morphology (36%). The
plasmacytoid/rhabdoid form consisted of sheets of tumor cells with abundant,
eccentrically placed eosinophilic cytoplasm, whereas similar cells were typically
rare and singly distributed in the basaloid variant. Glandular differentiation
was seen in a few tumors. None of the cases showed squamous differentiation or
surface dysplasia. By immunohistochemistry, the tumors were positive for
pancytokeratin (97%), CK5 (64%), p63 (55%), and CK7 (48%); and they were negative
for NUT (0%). Epstein-Barr virus and high-risk human papillomavirus was not
detected by in situ hybridization. Immunohistochemical loss of SMARCB1 (INI1)
expression was confirmed for all 39 tumors. Investigation of other proteins in
the SWI/SNF complex revealed co-loss of SMARCA2 in 4 cases, but none were SMARCA4
deficient or ARID1A deficient. Of 27 tumors with SMARCB1 fluorescence in situ
hybridization analysis, 14 showed homozygous (biallelic) deletions and 7 showed
heterozygous (monoallelic) deletions. SMARCB1-deficient sinonasal carcinoma
represents an emerging poorly differentiated/undifferentiated sinonasal carcinoma
that (1) cannot be better classified as another specific tumor type, (2) has
consistent histopathologic findings (albeit with some variability) with varying
proportions of plasmacytoid/rhabdoid cells, and (3) demonstrates an aggressive
clinical course. This entity should be considered in any difficult-to-classify
sinonasal carcinoma, as correct diagnosis will be mandatory for optimizing
therapy and for further delineation of this likely underdiagnosed disease.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000797 
PMCID: PMC5354087
PMID: 28291122  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
