

3156. Pediatrics. 2013 May;131(5):e1639-42. doi: 10.1542/peds.2012-1126. Epub 2013 Apr 
15.

Haemophilus influenzae type B in an immunocompetent, fully vaccinated ALL
survivor.

Nevin J(1), Kanter Washko J, Arnold J.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, Naval Medical Center, San Diego, San Diego,
California, USA. gtg968h@gmail.com

A 7-year-old boy with a history of recurrent acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), 
in remission, presented to primary care clinic after 2 days of progressive right 
hip pain with weight-bearing activities. He was otherwise asymptomatic at the
time of presentation. Blood cultures revealed Gram-negative diplococci, which
prompted an MRI that was significant for a hip joint effusion and femoral head
bone marrow edema. The patient had no sick contacts and no significant past
medical history other than ALL. The patient had been given all recommended
childhood vaccinations. Arthrocentesis and needle biopsy of the femoral neck were
not diagnostic for malignancy and revealed only mild hip joint inflammation,
leading to a diagnosis of osteomyelitis. The organism in the original blood
culture was identified as Haemophilus influenzae type b, Î²-lactamase negative.
Review of the patient's medical records showed a history of complete immunization
to Haemophilus influenzae type b. An immunologic evaluation was made to determine
if the patient retained immunity from his other vaccinations. Pathogen-specific
antibody testing revealed detectable antibodies to polio but not measles, mumps, 
rubella, varicella-zoster virus, tetanus, diphtheria, pertussis, or hepatitis B. 
This loss of immunologic memory appears to be a rarely described side effect of
ALL chemotherapy. There is currently no protocol to evaluate the immunologic
memory of patients who underwent chemotherapy for ALL or to revaccinate them
after their treatment. It is unclear whether the loss of immunologic memory is
genuinely rare or is underdiagnosed because affected patients are protected by
herd immunity.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2012-1126 
PMID: 23589809  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
