

3159. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2011 Jan;60(1):61-73. doi: 10.1007/s00262-010-0919-9. 
Epub 2010 Sep 17.

Lenalidomide enhances antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity of solid tumor
cells in vitro: influence of host immune and tumor markers.

Wu L(1), Parton A, Lu L, Adams M, Schafer P, Bartlett JB.

Author information: 
(1)Celgene Corporation, 86 Morris Ave, Summit, NJ 07901, USA.

We evaluated the effect of combining lenalidomide with therapeutic antibodies on 
antibody-dependant cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) of solid tumor cells, and
the requirement for expression of natural killer (NK) cell-activating receptors
and their solid tumor surface ligands. Twenty-three human tumor cell lines
(colon, breast, lung, head and neck, ovary, and bone sarcoma) were analyzed. NK
effector cells were isolated from healthy donors, pre-treated with and without
lenalidomide, and incubated with antibody-coated tumor cells to determine ADCC.
In blocking experiments, NK cells were pre-incubated with anti-DNAM-1 or
anti-NKG2D antibodies, and target colorectal cells were pre-incubated with
anti-CD155 (PVR), anti-MIC-A/B, or anti-ULBP 3 antibodies. Differences between
groups were assessed using unpaired and paired Student's t test and one-way
ANOVA. Lenalidomide enhanced NK cell-mediated ADCC of trastuzumab- and
cetuximab-coated tumor cells. Activity against colorectal cancer cells was
dependent on target antigen expression, but independent of KRAS status and
FcÎ³RIIIa genotype. The extent of ADCC and its enhancement by lenalidomide
correlated with NK cell expression of NKG2D and DNAM-1, and tumor cell expression
of PVR and MIC-A. Blocking of NKG2D and, to a lesser extent, DNAM-1 inhibited
ADCC. Anti-MIC-A/B monoclonal antibody blocked natural cytotoxicity, but not
ADCC. Lenalidomide enhances the ability of IgG1-isotype antibodies to mediate
ADCC of solid tumor cells, the extent of which is largely dependent on
NKG2D-NKG2D ligand interactions, but appears to be independent of MIC-A/B. This
provides a rationale for exploratory clinical studies and an assessment of
potential biomarkers predictive of clinical benefit.

DOI: 10.1007/s00262-010-0919-9 
PMID: 20848094  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
