

3163. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2012 Dec 1;61(4):469-76. doi:
10.1097/QAI.0b013e31826cba6c.

Association of regional body composition with bone mineral density in
HIV-infected and HIV-uninfected women: women's interagency HIV study.

Sharma A(1), Tian F, Yin MT, Keller MJ, Cohen M, Tien PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, State University of New York Downstate Medical Center,
Brooklyn, NY 11205, USA. anjali.sharma@downstate.edu

OBJECTIVE: To understand how regional body composition affects bone mineral
density (BMD) in HIV-infected and HIV-uninfected women.
METHODS: Dual energy x-ray absorptiometry was used to measure regional lean and
fat mass and BMD at lumbar spine (LS), total hip (TH), and femoral neck (FN) in
318 HIV-infected and 122 HIV-uninfected Women's Interagency HIV Study
participants at baseline and 2 and 5 years later. Total lean and fat mass were
measured using bioimpedance analysis. Multivariate marginal linear regression
models assessed the association of HIV status and body composition on BMD change.
RESULTS: Compared with HIV-uninfected women, HIV-infected women were older (44
vs. 37 years), more likely to be Hepatitis C virus-infected (32% vs. 14%), and
postmenopausal (26% vs. 3%) and had lower baseline total fat mass, trunk fat, and
leg fat. In multivariate models, increased total lean mass was independently
associated with increased BMD at LS, TH, and FN, and total fat mass was
associated with increased BMD at TH and FN (all P < 0.05). When total fat was
replaced in multivariate models with trunk fat and leg fat, increased trunk fat
(and not leg fat) was associated with increased TH and FN BMD (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Total fat and lean mass are strong independent predictors of TH and 
FN BMD, and lean mass was associated with greater LS BMD. Regardless of HIV
status, greater trunk fat (and not leg fat) was associated with increased TH and 
FN BMD, suggesting that weight-bearing fat may be a more important predictor of
BMD in the hip.

DOI: 10.1097/QAI.0b013e31826cba6c 
PMCID: PMC3494812
PMID: 22895436  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
