

3164. Oral Oncol. 2011 Jun;47(6):541-5. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2011.03.017. Epub
2011 Apr 7.

Tobacco smoking, alcohol drinking, and the risk of different histological types
of nasopharyngeal cancer in a low-risk population.

Polesel J(1), Franceschi S, Talamini R, Negri E, Barzan L, Montella M, Libra M,
Vaccher E, Franchin G, La Vecchia C, Serraino D.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Centro di Riferimento Oncologico,
IRCCS, Via F. Gallini 2, 33081 Aviano (PN), Italy. polesel@cro.it

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is rare in western Countries. Tobacco smoking is a
well-recognised risk factor, whereas the role of alcohol drinking is still in
debate. We conducted a hospital-based case-control study in Italy on 150,
histologically-confirmed, NPC cases of Caucasian ethnicity, aged 18-76years,
including 118 undifferentiated NPCs and 22 differentiated squamous-cell NPC.
Controls were 450 Caucasian cancer-free patients admitted to general hospitals
for acute conditions. Cases and controls were matched according to sex, age, and 
place of residence. Logistic regression was used to estimate odds ratios (OR) and
the corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CI) while adjusting for known
confounders. No significant association emerged between tobacco smoking and all
NPCs (OR for current vs. never smokers=1.52; 95% CI: 0.89-2.60). Conversely, for 
differentiated NPC only, statistically significant elevated OR were associated
with increasing smoking intensity (OR for ⩾15cigarettes/day=5.40; 95% CI:
1.34-21.76) and duration of the habit (OR for ⩾32years=4.48; 95% CI: 1.11-18.04).
Although alcohol drinking was not, per se, significantly associated to NPC risk, 
the combination of tobacco smoking and alcohol drinking accounted for 57% of
differentiated NPCs, whereas it accounted for only 14% of undifferentiated
carcinomas. Our findings suggest that, in western populations, NPC includes two
separate entities: the differentiated NPC, associated with tobacco smoking like
other cancers of head and neck, and the undifferentiated NPC, upon which tobacco 
smoking has little or no influence.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2011.03.017 
PMID: 21478046  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
