

3171. Rom J Morphol Embryol. 2016;57(2 Suppl):885-891.

Tonsillar lymphoma masquerading as obstructive sleep apnea - pediatric case
report.

Toader C(1), Toader M, Stoica A, Pop G, Oprea A, Constantin AS, Niculescu L,
Vivisenco IC, Drăghici MS, Osman A, Mogoantă CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, "Grigore Alexandrescu" Clinical Emergency
Hospital for Children, Bucharest, Romania; toadermiorita@yahoo.com.

The commonest cause of head and neck malignancy in pediatric patients is
lymphoma. A particular case is the tonsillar lymphoma. Even though unilateral
tonsillar enlargement represents an ominous sign for neoplasia, clinical
manifestations vary and are non-specific. Therefore, a delayed diagnosis is
performed which compromises optimal therapy and hinders the prognosis. We present
the case of a 5-year-old boy who was initially diagnosed with obstructive sleep
apnea, without reported systemic complaints. Asymmetric tonsillar hypertrophy
created the premises for performing a tonsillectomy to rule out malignancy. The
pathological evaluation of the resected tonsils revealed a malignant
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, with immunophenotypic features consistent with sporadic
type Burkitt lymphoma. The aim of this paper is to emphasize the importance of
the histopathological examination and of the immunohistochemistry testing for the
prompt and accurate diagnosis of all asymmetric tonsillar hypertrophy in children
undergoing tonsillectomy. Furthermore, immunohistochemical diagnosis is vital for
establishing a personalized multi-agent chemotherapy regimen, which dramatically 
improves the survival rate. We recommend histopathological evaluation in all
children with asymmetric tonsillar hypertrophy undergoing tonsillectomy for
various reasons. Needless to say, it is better to be cautious and exclude the
presence of tonsillar lymphoma, than to confront with the severe consequences of 
misdiagnosis.


PMID: 27833988  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
