

3174. World J Gastroenterol. 2016 Jan 7;22(1):427-34. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v22.i1.427.

Solid, non-skin, post-liver transplant tumors: Key role of lifestyle and
immunosuppression management.

Carenco C(1), Faure S(1), Ursic-Bedoya J(1), Herrero A(1), Pageaux GP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Christophe Carenco, Stéphanie Faure, José Ursic-Bedoya, Astrid Herrero,
Georges Philippe Pageaux, Liver Transplant Unit, CHRU Montpellier, 34090
Montpellier, France.

Liver transplantation has been the treatment of choice for end-stage liver
disease since 1983. Cancer has emerged as a major long-term cause of death for
liver transplant recipients. Many retrospective studies that have explored
standardized incidence ratio have reported increased rates of solid organ cancers
post-liver transplantation; some have also studied risk factors. Liver
transplantation results in a two to five-fold mean increase in the rate of solid 
organ cancers. Risk of head and neck, lung, esophageal, cervical cancers and
Kaposi's sarcoma is high, but risk of colorectal cancer is not clearly
demonstrated. There appears to be no excess risk of developing breast or prostate
cancer. Environmental risk factors such as viral infection and tobacco
consumption, and personal risk factors such as obesity play a key role, but
recent data also implicate the role of calcineurin inhibitors, whose cumulative
and dose-dependent effects on cell metabolism might play a direct role in
oncogenesis. In this paper, we review the results of studies assessing the
incidence of non-skin solid tumors in order to understand the mechanisms
underlying solid cancers in post-liver transplant patients and, ultimately,
discuss how to prevent these cancers. Immunosuppressive protocol changes,
including a calcineurin inhibitor-free regimen, combined with dietary guidelines 
and smoking cessation, are theoretically the best preventive measures.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v22.i1.427 
PMCID: PMC4698505
PMID: 26755888  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
