

3176. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2014 Jan;52(1):46-50.

[Clinical characteristics and antimicrobial resistance of invasive group A
β-hemolytic streptococcus infection in children].

[Article in Chinese]

Fan J(1), Dong L(2), Chen Z(1), Bei D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Yuying Children's Hospital Affiliated to Wenzhou
Medical University, Wenzhou 325027, China.
(2)Department of Pulmonology, Yuying Children's Hospital Affiliated to Wenzhou
Medical University, Wenzhou 325027, China. Email: donglin@wzhealth.com.

OBJECTIVE: Group A β-hemolytic streptococcus (GAS) or Streptococcus pyogenes may 
be encountered in diverse clinical situations in children. A rising incidence of 
invasive group A streptococcus (IGAS) infections has been noted in children in
the past three decades. The aim of this study was to summarize the clinical
characteristics and antimicrobial resistance of IGAS in children, and to raise
the level of diagnosis and treatment of this infection.
METHOD: The clinical data from 19 cases of IGAS younger than 14 years old seen
from January 2004 to December 2011 treated in the authors' hospital were
analyzed. IGAS infections are defined as the isolation of GAS from a normally
sterile site in patients.
RESULT: The 19 cases were identified as IGAS infections, among whom 15 were male 
and 4 were female, and the ratio of them was 3.75. The age ranged from 1 day to
14 years, with a median age of 4 years. The course of disease was 4 h-10 days.
The average length of stay was 12.2 days. In 13 cases the episodes of the
infection occurred in winter and spring. In 18 cases the infection was
community-acquired. Overall, 10 cases had neck or foot dorsum abscess, four cases
had purulent peritonitis, and 3 cases were diagnosed as streptococcal toxic shock
syndrome (STSS) complicated with empyema, pyopneumothorax occurred in 1 case and 
neonatal septicemia in another. Three cases had an underlying disease, including 
2 cases wounded in a car accident and 1 case of congenital esophageal atresia and
tracheoesophageal fistula. Before the isolation of GAS, 5 cases had stayed in
ICUs, the length of ICU stay was 1-32 days, 4 cases had received intubation and
mechanical ventilation, the ventilation time was 8 h-24 days, 2 cases had
received major surgery; 5 cases had other pathogen coinfection, including 4 cases
of abdominal pus at the same time and Escherichia coli was isolated, and 1 case
had parainfluenza virus type I coinfection. Peripheral blood leucocyte increased 
in 18 cases, one case dropped off. The C-reactive protein (CRP) levels increased 
in all patients, including 16 cases who had 14-160 mg/L, 3 cases had levels
higher than 160 mg/L. Twenty strains of GAS were isolated from 19 cases' sterile 
sites, of them 10 strains were isolated from abscess, 4 strains were isolated
from blood and another 4 from ascites. Two strains were from the same patient at 
different times of pleural effusion. All 20 strains displayed a full
susceptibility to cefazolin, levofloxacin and vancomycin, and the rates of
resistance to both cefotaxime and penicillin were 10.0%. The rates of resistance 
to erythromycin and clindamycin were 55.0% and 70.0% respectively. Among the
patients 3 cases were cured, 14 cases improved, and 2 cases died, of whom 1 case 
died of STSS secondary to multiple organ dysfunction, 1 case died of basic
disease secondary to multiple organ dysfunction.
CONCLUSION: Skin and soft tissues were the most common IGAS infection sites in
children, and IGAS infection also can lead to serious STSS and even can be life
threatening. Penicillin and cephalosporin are still sensitive for children IGAS
infections.


PMID: 24680408  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
