

3178. J Pathol. 2012 Feb;226(3):471-81. doi: 10.1002/path.2997. Epub 2011 Oct 19.

Inhibition of NOTCH3 signalling significantly enhances sensitivity to cisplatin
in EBV-associated nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Man CH(1), Wei-Man Lun S, Wai-Ying Hui J, To KF, Choy KW, Wing-Hung Chan A, Chow 
C, Tin-Yun Chung G, Tsao SW, Tak-Chun Yip T, Busson P, Lo KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, State Key Laboratory in
Oncology in South China, Prince of Wales Hospital, Chinese University of Hong
Kong, SAR.

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is an EBV-associated epithelial malignancy which
is prevalent in south-east Asia and southern China. Despite the multiple genetic 
and epigenetic changes reported, the contribution of dysregulated signalling
pathways to this distinct type of head and neck cancer is not well understood.
Here we demonstrate the up-regulation of NOTCH ligands (JAG1 or DLL4) and
effector (HEY1) in the majority of EBV-positive tumour lines and primary tumours.
Among the NOTCH receptors, NOTCH3 was over-expressed in all EBV-positive tumour
lines and 92.5% of primary tumours. Aberrant activation of NOTCH3 signalling was 
consistently detected in all these samples. These findings imply that NOTCH3 may 
play an crucial role in the development of NPC. By NOTCH3 specific siRNA, NOTCH3 
signalling was suppressed and thereby significant growth inhibition and apoptosis
induction occurred in NPC cells. Down-regulation of a number of targets involved 
in cell proliferation, eg CCND1, C-MYC,NFKB1, and survival, eg BCL2, BCL-XL,
SURVIVIN, was confirmed in the NOTCH3 knockdown NPC cells. Importantly, NOTCH3
knockdown highly enhanced the sensitivity of NPC cells to cisplatin treatment.
Furthermore, we revealed that the ability of NPC cells to form spheroids in vitro
and tumours in nude mice was also significantly decreased after knockdown of
NICD3 expression. These findings indicate that activation of NOTCH3 pathway is a 
critical oncogenic event in NPC tumourigenesis. Targeting NOTCH3 signalling may
serve as a potential therapeutic approach for treating patients suffering from
EBV-associated NPC.

Copyright Â© 2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/path.2997 
PMID: 22009689  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
