

3179. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Feb 10;7(2):e1001276. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001276.

The RON2-AMA1 interaction is a critical step in moving junction-dependent
invasion by apicomplexan parasites.

Lamarque M(1), Besteiro S, Papoin J, Roques M, Vulliez-Le Normand B, Morlon-Guyot
J, Dubremetz JF, Fauquenoy S, Tomavo S, Faber BW, Kocken CH, Thomas AW, Boulanger
MJ, Bentley GA, Lebrun M.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 5235 CNRS, Universit√© de Montpellier 2, Montpellier, France.

Obligate intracellular Apicomplexa parasites share a unique invasion mechanism
involving a tight interaction between the host cell and the parasite surfaces
called the moving junction (MJ). The MJ, which is the anchoring structure for the
invasion process, is formed by secretion of a macromolecular complex
(RON2/4/5/8), derived from secretory organelles called rhoptries, into the host
cell membrane. AMA1, a protein secreted from micronemes and associated with the
parasite surface during invasion, has been shown in vitro to bind the MJ complex 
through a direct association with RON2. Here we show that RON2 is inserted as an 
integral membrane protein in the host cell and, using several interaction assays 
with native or recombinant proteins, we define the region that binds AMA1. Our
studies were performed both in Toxoplasma gondii and Plasmodium falciparum and
although AMA1 and RON2 proteins have diverged between Apicomplexa species, we
show an intra-species conservation of their interaction. More importantly,
invasion inhibition assays using recombinant proteins demonstrate that the
RON2-AMA1 interaction is crucial for both T. gondii and P. falciparum entry into 
their host cells. This work provides the first evidence that AMA1 uses the
rhoptry neck protein RON2 as a receptor to promote invasion by Apicomplexa
parasites.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001276 
PMCID: PMC3037350
PMID: 21347343  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
