

318. J Craniomaxillofac Surg. 2010 Jun;38(4):266-70. doi: 10.1016/j.jcms.2009.08.001. 
Epub 2009 Sep 12.

Head and neck lesions of Kimura's disease: exclusion of human herpesvirus-8 and
Epstein-Barr virus by in situ hybridisation and polymerase chain reaction. An
immunohistochemical study.

Pitak-Arnnop P(1), Bellefqih S, Chaine A, Dhanuthai K, Bertrand JC, Bertolus C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Maxillofacial Surgery, AP-HP, Pitié-Salpêtrière University
Hospital Faculty of Medicine, University Paris 6 Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris,
France. poramate.pitakarnnop@gmail.com

INTRODUCTION: Kimura's disease (KD) is a chronic inflammatory disorder,
characterised by tumour-like lesions in the head and neck region, producing
salivary gland nodules and lymph node enlargement. Many authors suggest that KD
is a reactive immunological disorder; however, its aetiology remains unknown.
AIMS: To study immunohistochemical characteristics of head and neck lesions of KD
(H&N-KD) and to investigate the possible role of human herpesvirus-8 (HHV-8) and 
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) in the development of H&N-KD.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This study enrolled five H&N-KD specimens from three
patients treated between 1995 and 2005 at Pitié-Salpêtrière University Hospital, 
Paris, France. Immunohistochemical studies were performed on formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded tissue. HHV-8 DNA was determined by polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) analysis, whilst EBV sequences were identified by PCR and in situ
hybridisation.
RESULTS: The immunohistochemical studies revealed CD20+ germinal centres with
prominent staining of CD23+ dendritic reticular cells, surrounded by numerous
interfollicular CD3+, and CD4+ or CD8+ T-cells. Factor VIII-related antigen, CD31
and CD34 occurred in the thin-walled blood vessels. The reactivity of CD1a, HHV-8
and EBV-associated latent membrane protein 1-EBV (LMP1-EBV) were negative, and in
situ hybridisation confirmed the lack of EBV DNA. No patient recalled an external
insult or chronic irritation.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study indicate the reactive nature of H&N-KD (or
a subset of H&N-KD), and it is unlikely that HHV-8 and EBV play a role in the
pathogenesis of the lesion. However, the patients in this series did not have
previous history of trauma or chronic irritation; thus, a neoplastic origin could
not be excluded. Further multicentre studies based on more specimens are
warranted.

Copyright (c) 2009 European Association for Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Surgery.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcms.2009.08.001 
PMID: 19748788  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
