

3180. Int J Hyg Environ Health. 2015 Jul;218(5):444-51. doi:
10.1016/j.ijheh.2015.03.010. Epub 2015 Mar 27.

Investigation of the relationship between low environmental exposure to metals
and bone mineral density, bone resorption and renal function.

Callan AC(1), Devine A(2), Qi L(3), Ng JC(3), Hinwood AL(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical Sciences, Edith Cowan University, 270 Joondalup Drive,
Joondalup WA 6027, Australia; Centre for Ecosystem Management, Edith Cowan
University, 270 Joondalup Drive, Joondalup WA 6027, Australia. Electronic
address: a.callan@ecu.edu.au.
(2)School of Exercise and Health Sciences, Edith Cowan University, 270 Joondalup 
Drive, WA 6027, Australia.
(3)The University of Queensland, National Research Centre for Environmental
Toxicology (Entox), 39 Kessels Road, Coopers Plains, Brisbane 4108, Australia.
(4)Centre for Ecosystem Management, Edith Cowan University, 270 Joondalup Drive, 
Joondalup WA 6027, Australia.

Environmental exposure to metals has been linked to adverse health outcomes.
Exposure to cadmium has been associated with decreased bone density, an increased
risk of osteoporotic fracture and possible renal dysfunction. Older women are a
group at risk of renal and bone density impacts and exposure to metals may be an 
important risk factor for these health outcomes. This study was a cross sectional
study of 77 women aged 50 years and above examining the relationship between
metals exposure and renal and bone health. Urinary and blood metals
concentrations, plasma creatinine, iron, ferritin and transferrin were measured
in these subjects. Bone biomarkers assessed included the pyridinium crosslinks,
pyridinoline and deoxypyridinoline measured by ELISA. Renal function was assessed
using eGFR and KIM-1. Whole body, hip and lumbar spine bone mineral density was
assessed using DEXA. Blood and urinary metals concentrations were generally low
in the subjects, with a median urinary cadmium concentration of 0.26 μg/g
creatinine (range <0.065-1.03 μg/g). Urinary cadmium was found to be a
significant predictor of bone mineral density at whole body, lumber spine, total 
hip and femoral neck, with increasing urinary Cd concentrations associated with
decreased bone density. Urinary cadmium and aluminium concentrations were
positively correlated with bone resorption whilst blood zinc and mercury
concentrations were negatively correlated. Urinary aluminium was positively
correlated with KIM-1 concentrations, a marker of early kidney damage, however
blood zinc concentrations were significantly negatively correlated with this
biomarker. This study provides additional support for low cadmium exposure being 
of concern for the health of older women. Further investigation into the role of 
exposure to other metals on bone and renal health is warranted.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijheh.2015.03.010 
PMID: 25857756  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
