

320. Acta Dermatovenerol Alp Pannonica Adriat. 2012 Dec;21(4):73-5.

Comparative evaluation of the Abbott RealTime High Risk HPV test and INNO-LiPA
HPV Genotyping Extra test for detecting and identifying human papillomaviruses in
archival tissue specimens of head and neck cancers.

Kocjan BJ(1), Maver PJ, Hosnjak L, Zidar N, Odar K, Gale N, Poljak M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Ljubljana, Zalo≈°ka cesta 4, SI-1105 Ljubljana, Slovenia.

INTRODUCTION: The Abbott RealTime is a novel real-time PCR assay designed for
concurrent individual genotyping of HPV16 and HPV18 and pooled detection of 12
HPV genotypes: HPV31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 56, 58, 59, 66, and 68 in cervical 
swab specimens. In this study, the performance of RealTime for detecting HPV in
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue specimens of head and neck cancers was
compared to the Innogenetics INNO-LiPA assay, which allows identification of 28
HPVs, including all 14 covered by RealTime.
METHODS: A total of 60 FFPE tissue specimens obtained from the same number of
patients with histologically confirmed cancer of the oral cavity or oropharynx
were included in the study. Following DNA extraction using a Qiagen DNA Mini Kit,
RealTime and INNO-LiPA were performed on all samples, as instructed by the
manufacturers.
RESULTS: A 136-bp fragment of human beta-globin serving as an internal control in
RealTime was successfully amplified from all 60 tissue samples included in the
study. RealTime and INNO-LiPA showed 100% agreement and detected HPV DNA in 5/60 
(8.3%) of the cancer samples, which all contained genotype HPV16.
CONCLUSIONS: RealTime assay is a reliable, sensitive, and specific diagnostic
tool for the detection and partial genotyping of targeted HPV genotypes in FFPE
tissue specimens of oral and oropharyngeal cancer.


PMID: 23599127  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
