

325. Exp Mol Pathol. 2014 Jun;96(3):310-5. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2014.03.010. Epub 2014
Apr 1.

Detection of viral pathogens in high grade gliomas from unmapped next-generation 
sequencing data.

Cimino PJ(1), Zhao G(2), Wang D(3), Sehn JK(4), Lewis JS Jr(5), Duncavage EJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuropathology, Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington
University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, United States.
(2)Division of Laboratory and Genomic Medicine, Department of Pathology and
Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, United
States.
(3)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, United States; Department of Pathology and Immunology,
Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, United States.
(4)Division of Anatomic and Molecular Pathology, Department of Pathology and
Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, United
States.
(5)Division of Anatomic and Molecular Pathology, Department of Pathology and
Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, United
States; Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Washington University
School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, United States.
(6)Division of Anatomic and Molecular Pathology, Department of Pathology and
Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, United
States. Electronic address: EDuncavage@path.wustl.edu.

Viral pathogens have been implicated in the development of certain cancers
including human papillomavirus (HPV) in squamous cell carcinoma and Epstein-Barr 
virus (EBV) in Burkitt's lymphoma. The significance of viral pathogens in brain
tumors is controversial, and human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) has been associated
with glioblastoma (GBM) in some but not all studies, making the role of HCMV
unclear. In this study we sought to determine if viral pathogen sequences could
be identified in an unbiased manner from previously discarded, unmapped,
non-human, next-generation sequencing (NGS) reads obtained from targeted
oncology, panel-based sequencing of high grade gliomas (HGGs), including GBMs.
Twenty one sequential HGG cases were analyzed by a targeted NGS clinical oncology
panel containing 151 genes using DNA obtained from formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue. Sequencing reads that did not map to the human
genome (average of 38,000 non-human reads/case (1.9%)) were filtered and low
quality reads removed. Extracted high quality reads were then sequentially
aligned to the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) non-redundant
nucleotide (nt and nr) databases. Aligned reads were classified based on NCBI
taxonomy database and all eukaryotic viral sequences were further classified into
viral families. Two viral sequences (both herpesviruses), EBV and Roseolovirus
were detected in 5/21 (24%) cases and in 1/21 (5%) cases, respectively. None of
the cases had detectable HCMV. Of the five HGG cases with detectable EBV DNA,
four had additional material for EBV in situ hybridization (ISH), all of which
were negative for expressed viral sequence. Overall, a similar discovery approach
using unmapped non-human NGS reads could be used to discover viral sequences in
other cancer types.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2014.03.010 
PMID: 24704430  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
