

328. PLoS Pathog. 2016 Aug 22;12(8):e1005844. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005844.
eCollection 2016 Aug.

EBV Nuclear Antigen 3C Mediates Regulation of E2F6 to Inhibit E2F1 Transcription 
and Promote Cell Proliferation.

Pei Y(1), Banerjee S(1), Sun Z(1), Jha HC(1), Saha A(2), Robertson ES(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, and the Tumor
Virology Program, Abramson Comprehensive Cancer Center, Perelman School of
Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United
States of America.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Presidency University, Kolkata, India.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is considered a ubiquitous herpesvirus with the ability 
to cause latent infection in humans worldwide. EBV-association is evidently
linked to different types of human malignancies, mainly of epithelial and
lymphoid origin. Of interest is the EBV nuclear antigen 3C (EBNA3C) which is
critical for EBV-mediated immortalization. Recently, EBNA3C was shown to bind the
E2F1 transcription regulator. The E2F transcription factors have crucial roles in
various cellular functions, including cell cycle, DNA replication, DNA repair,
cell mitosis, and cell fate. Specifically, E2F6, one of the unique E2F family
members, is known to be a pRb-independent transcription repressor of E2F-target
genes. In our current study, we explore the role of EBNA3C in regulating E2F6
activities. We observed that EBNA3C plays an important role in inducing E2F6
expression in LCLs. Our study also shows that EBNA3C physically interacts with
E2F6 at its amino and carboxy terminal domains and they form a protein complex in
human cells. In addition, EBNA3C stabilizes the E2F6 protein and is co-localized 
in the nucleus. We also demonstrated that both EBNA3C and E2F6 contribute to
reduction in E2F1 transcriptional activity. Moreover, E2F1 forms a protein
complex with EBNA3C and E2F6, and EBNA3C competes with E2F1 for E2F6 binding.
E2F6 is also recruited by EBNA3C to the E2F1 promoter, which is critical for
EBNA3C-mediated cell proliferation. These results demonstrate a critical role for
E2F family members in EBV-induced malignancies, and provide new insights for
targeting E2F transcription factors in EBV-associated cancers as potential
therapeutic intervention strategies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005844 
PMCID: PMC4993364
PMID: 27548379  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
