

33. Oral Dis. 2015 May;21(4):417-31. doi: 10.1111/odi.12269. Epub 2014 Aug 11.

Human papillomavirus and cancerous diseases of the head and neck: a systematic
review and meta-analysis.

Saulle R(1), Semyonov L, Mannocci A, Careri A, Saburri F, Ottolenghi L, Guerra F,
La Torre G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Infectious Diseases, "Sapienza" University of 
Rome, Rome, Italy.

The increasing incidence of head and neck cancer (HNSCC) highlights the need to
better understand the role of human papillomavirus (HPV) in the development of
these cancers. The aims of this study were to conduct a systematic review and a
meta-analysis concerning observational studies on the association between HPV
infection and HNSCC and to quantify this association, thereby obtaining a
reliable estimation of the risk of HPV infection in the development of head and
neck cancer. Literature searches were performed using PubMed and Scopus
databases. StatsDirect 2.7.8 program was used for the analysis. We found 15
case-control studies, 63 prevalence studies, and no cohort studies. The pooled
odds ratio (OR) for all the included case-control studies resulted in a value of 
1.63 (95% CI 1.27-2.09; P < 0.0001). The highest pooled OR resulted from the
analysis of all the studies that examined HPV 16 genotype in association oral
cavity (OR 5.36; 95% CI 1.4-20). The strong evidence of association between HPV
infection and HNSCC highlights the importance of the introduction of specific
tests in the cancer prevention practices to evaluate the presence of the virus,
especially in the oral cavity, and the possibility of an extension of the vaccine
anti-HPV in the male population too.

Â© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/odi.12269 
PMID: 24962169  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
