

348. J Virol. 2015 Jan 15;89(2):1267-77. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02997-14. Epub 2014 Nov 12.

Electron cryotomography studies of maturing HIV-1 particles reveal the assembly
pathway of the viral core.

Woodward CL(1), Cheng SN(1), Jensen GJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California,
USA.
(2)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California,
USA Howard Hughes Medical Institute, California Institute of Technology,
Pasadena, California, USA jensen@caltech.edu.

To better characterize the assembly of the HIV-1 core, we have used electron
cryotomography (ECT) to image infected cells and the viral particles
cryopreserved next to them. We observed progressive stages of virus assembly and 
egress, including flower-like flat Gag lattice assemblies, hemispherical budding 
profiles, and virus buds linked to the plasma membrane via a thin membrane neck. 
The population of budded viral particles contains immature,
maturation-intermediate, and mature core morphologies. Structural characteristics
of the maturation intermediates suggest that the core assembly pathway involves
the formation of a CA sheet that associates with the condensed ribonucleoprotein 
(RNP) complex. Our analysis also reveals a correlation between RNP localization
within the viral particle and the formation of conical cores, suggesting that the
RNP helps drive conical core assembly. Our findings support an assembly pathway
for the HIV-1 core that begins with a small CA sheet that associates with the RNP
to form the core base, followed by polymerization of the CA sheet along one side 
of the conical core toward the tip, and then closure around the body of the
cone.IMPORTANCE: During HIV-1 assembly and release, the Gag polyprotein is
organized into a signature hexagonal lattice, termed the immature lattice. To
become infectious, the newly budded virus must disassemble the immature lattice
by proteolyzing Gag and then reassemble the key proteolytic product, the
structural protein p24 (CA), into a distinct, mature hexagonal lattice during a
process termed maturation. The mature HIV-1 virus contains a conical capsid that 
encloses the condensed viral genome at its wide base. Mutations or small
molecules that interfere with viral maturation also disrupt viral infectivity.
Little is known about the assembly pathway that results in the conical core and
genome encapsidation. Here, we have used electron cryotomography to structurally 
characterize HIV-1 particles that are actively maturing. Based on the
morphologies of core assembly intermediates, we propose that CA forms a
sheet-like structure that associates with the condensed viral genome to produce
the mature infectious conical core.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02997-14 
PMCID: PMC4300640
PMID: 25392219  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
