

356. Med Mol Morphol. 2015 Mar;48(1):54-9. doi: 10.1007/s00795-014-0072-1. Epub 2014
Mar 28.

CD56-positive adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma: a case report and a review of the
literature.

Sugimoto KJ(1), Shimada A, Wakabayashi M, Sekiguchi Y, Nakamura N, Sawada T, Ota 
Y, Komatsu N, Noguchi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Juntendo University Urayasu Hospital, 2-1-1 Tomioka,
Urayasu, 279-0021, Japan, keijis@juntendo.ac.jp.

A 67-year-old woman presented with a swelling on both sides of the neck. Biopsy
of an enlarged cervical lymph node on the left side and flow cytometric analysis 
revealed CD56-positive CD4(+)CD8(+) abnormal NK/T cells. A Southern blot analysis
of the cervical lymph node biopsy specimen showed a human T-cell leukemia virus
type 1 provirus DNA monoclonal band. Based on these findings, the patient was
diagnosed with CD56-positive adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma. After five cycles of
cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone therapy, the general
condition of the patient gradually declined, indicating resistance to treatment, 
and approximately 9Â months after the onset of symptoms, the patient died. CD56 is
recognized as an unfavorable prognostic marker in cases of acute myeloid leukemia
with t(8;21), acute promyelocytic leukemia, and anaplastic large cell lymphoma.
Only eight cases of CD56-positive adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma have been
reported so far in the literature. Most of these cases were in the advanced stage
at diagnosis and had poor outcomes. It appears that the correlation between CD56 
expression and outcomes in patients with adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma should be
clarified by investigating a larger number of cases in the future.

DOI: 10.1007/s00795-014-0072-1 
PMID: 24676459  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
