

358. Int J Cancer. 2013 Sep 1;133(5):1214-21. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28120. Epub 2013 Mar
29.

Long-term regional control in the observed neck following definitive
chemoradiation for node-positive oropharyngeal squamous cell cancer.

Goenka A(1), Morris LG, Rao SS, Wolden SL, Wong RJ, Kraus DH, Ohri N, Setton J,
Lok BH, Riaz N, Mychalczak BR, Schoder H, Ganly I, Shah JP, Pfister DG, Zelefsky 
MJ, Lee NY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, NY, USA. anuj.goenka@gmail.com

Traditionally, patients treated with chemoradiotherapy for node-positive
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (N+ OPSCC) have undergone a planned neck
dissection (ND) after treatment. Recently, negative post-treatment
positron-emission tomography (PET)/computed tomography (CT) imaging has been
found to have a high negative predictive value for the presence of residual
disease in the neck. Here, we present the first comprehensive analysis of a
large, uniform cohort of N+ OPSCC patients achieving a PET/CT-based complete
response (CR) after chemoradiotherapy, and undergoing observation, rather than
ND. From 2002 to 2009, 302 patients with N+ OPSCC treated with 70 Gy
intensity-modulated radiation therapy and concurrent chemotherapy underwent
post-treatment clinical assessment including PET/CT. CR was defined as no
evidence of disease on clinical examination and post-treatment PET/CT. ND was
reserved for patients with <CR on either PET/CT, clinical examination, or other
imaging. 260 patients (86.1%) had clinical and radiographic CRs, and underwent
neck observation (rate of regional control, 97.7%; 5-year overall survival,
79.8%). The four observed patients experiencing neck recurrence had initial
staging of N1 (n = 2), N2b (n = 1), and N2c (n = 1). Three of four were
successfully surgically salvaged. There was no association between N stage and
rate of neck recurrence (p = 0.74). 52 and 25% of patients undergoing ND had
viable tumor in the neck after positive and negative PET/CT, respectively. We
conclude that patients achieving CRs after chemoradiation, based on clinical and 
PET/CT assessment, have a high probability of regional control, with a 2.3%
regional failure rate, and may be safely observed without planned ND.

Copyright © 2013 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.28120 
PMCID: PMC4570243
PMID: 23436584  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
