

359. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Jun 7;435(3):339-44. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.04.060. Epub 2013 Apr 27.

A novel function of HPV16-E6/E7 in epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Jung YS(1), Kato I, Kim HR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University
School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) 16 is among the most important etiological factors in 
many human cancers, including head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs) not
associated with alcohol or tobacco use. HPV16-E6 and E7 oncoproteins target
intracellular signaling networks, altering key molecular and cellular events
during tumor progression. The present study investigates the role of HPV16-E6 and
E7 oncogenes on the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a cellular process
thought to be critical for tumor cell invasion and metastasis. Using the
epithelial MDCK cell line as an in vitro model, we show that the stable
expression of HPV16-E6 or E7 induces morphological conversion from
cobblestone-shaped epithelium to spindle-shaped mesenchyme-like phenotype.
Consistent with these morphological changes, both E6 and E7 induce expression of 
the EMT-activating transcriptional factors Slug, Twist, ZEB1 and ZEB2, especially
ZEBs, accompanied with switch from epithelial to mesenchymal markers.
Importantly, E6 and E7 expression results in induction of the migratory and
invasive potential, a functional hallmark of EMT. When we examined the
association between HPV16 and the EMT signature in HNSCC cell lines derived from 
head and neck cancer patients, we found a correlation between HPV16 positivity
and the expression of EMT transcription factor ZEB1. Taken together, our findings
suggest HPV16 induces EMT-like processes via induction of the EMT transcription
factors which may contribute to tumor progression and metastasis.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.04.060 
PMID: 23628416  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
