

36. Ann Surg Oncol. 2015 Dec;22 Suppl 3:S979-84. doi: 10.1245/s10434-015-4808-5. Epub
2015 Aug 19.

HPV and EBV Infections in Neck Metastases from Occult Primary Squamous Cell
Carcinoma: Another Virus-Related Neoplastic Disease in the Head and Neck Region.

Bussu F(1), Sali M(2), Gallus R(3), Petrone G(4), Autorino R(5), Santangelo R(2),
Pandolfini M(1), Miccichè F(5), Delogu G(2), Almadori G(1), Galli J(1),
Sanguinetti M(2), Rindi G(4), Tommasino M(6), Valentini V(5), Paludetti G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Otolaryngology, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome,
Italy.
(2)Institute of Microbiology, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy.
(3)Institute of Otolaryngology, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome,
Italy. gallusroberto@gmail.com.
(4)Institute of Histopathology, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome,
Italy.
(5)Institute of Radiotherapy, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy.
(6)Infections and Cancer Biology Group, International Agency for Research on
Cancer, World Health Organization, Lyon, France.

BACKGROUND: Approximately 1-9 % of all head and neck squamous cell carcinomas are
neck metastases from clinically undetectable primary tumors. Human papillomavirus
(HPV) and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) are proven carcinogenic factors that are
associated with oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma and nasopharyngeal
carcinoma, respectively. In the present study, we evaluated the prevalence of
these viruses in neck metastases from unknown primary squamous cell carcinoma.
METHODS: We evaluated fresh samples from a consecutive series of 22 neck
dissections for metastases from unknown primary squamous cell carcinoma obtained 
between 2010 and 2012 at a single institution. The samples were tested for the
presence of HPV E6 and E7 mRNA and EBV DNA.
RESULTS: Oncogenic viral infections were detected in 12 cases (54 % total; 2
HPV18, 5 HPV16, 2 EBV infection, and 3 EBV/HPV16 coinfections). The most frequent
primarily involved neck level in our series was IIA (70 %), which had the highest
prevalence of viral infection (66 %). We did not find any other significant
correlations between virus detection and clinicopathologic parameters or
prognosis.
DISCUSSION: Neck metastasis from unknown primary squamous cell carcinoma could be
another virus-related malignancy in the head and neck region, along with
nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal carcinoma. An evaluation of the impact of viral 
infection on patient prognosis and sensitivities to different treatment
modalities could modify our prognostic assessments and treatment planning.
Furthermore, virus detection would have a decisive impact on
diagnostic/decisional algorithms, especially if detection methods are implemented
on cytologic samples (e.g., thin prep).

DOI: 10.1245/s10434-015-4808-5 
PMID: 26286196  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
