

363. Auris Nasus Larynx. 2018 Feb;45(1):170-174. doi: 10.1016/j.anl.2016.12.010. Epub 
2017 Jan 27.

Lymphoepithelial carcinoma in parotid gland related to EBV infection: A case
report.

Maeda H(1), Yamashiro T(2), Yamashita Y(2), Hirakawa H(2), Agena S(2), Uehara
T(2), Matayoshi S(2), Suzuki M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Graduate School of
Medicine, University of the Ryukyus, Japan. Electronic address:
maeidahiroyuki@yahoo.co.jp.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Graduate School of
Medicine, University of the Ryukyus, Japan.

Lymphoepithelial carcinoma commonly occurs at the nasopharynx and rarely occurs
at other sites in the head and neck region. It is well known to occur at limited 
patients of local area as Asia or Arctic Circle. Related to this point, it is
pointed out that this tumor has strong relation with Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV)
infection. In this time, we experienced to treat lymphoepithelial carcinoma with 
metastatic cervical lymph nodes occurring at parotid gland. The morbidity ratio
of this tumor is less than one percent of all parotid gland tumors. Moreover, we 
proved the infection of EBV to tumor cell by in situ hybridization (ISH).
Incidentally, because it is considered that this tumor has well sensitivity
against irradiation or anti-tumor drugs, prognosis of this tumor is better than
that of other head and neck tumors with different pathological type. Actually, we
tried to perform chemotherapy twice in (Nedaplatin (CDGP) 60mg/m2×day 2 and 5-FU 
600mg/m2×day 5) and to irradiate about 70Gy dose against parotid gland and
cervical lymph nodes. It could not find local recurrence or metastasis as of now 
after five years from treatment.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anl.2016.12.010 
PMID: 28139343  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
