

364. Mikrobiyol Bul. 2014 Oct;48(4):689-706.

[Current problems and recent advances in the molecular diagnosis of genital human
papillomavirus infections].

[Article in Turkish]

Sahiner F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gulhane Military Medical Academy, Department of Medical Microbiology, Ankara, 
Turkey. fsvirol@gmail.com.

It was proven in the early 1980s that cervical cancer (CC) biopsy specimens and
CC cell lines contain human papillomavirus (HPV) DNA sequences. In subsequent
years, researchers discovered that the E6 and E7 genes of HPV are expressed in CC
tissues and these oncoproteins interact with cellular proteins, including pRb and
p53. Establishment of the relationship between HPV infections and CC led to
increasing interest on this topic. Comprehensive epidemiological studies
determined that specific types of HPV are major risk factors for CC. These HPV
types, called high-risk or oncogenic types, are associated with other anogenital 
cancers and a subset of head and neck cancers. A number of commercial and
in-house diagnostic techniques, each of which has a different approach and
methodology, have been developed to diagnose HPV infections. HPV testing based on
the detection of viral DNA has become an important part of CC screening programs.
These screening-typing methods and combined approaches, which are used to
diagnose and follow-up (management) HPV infections, have advantages and
disadvantages. The choice of method is complicated by several factors and
challenges that arise owing to the nature of the virus and the assay methodology.
For example, a number of different HPV types can cause genital infections,
multiple sequence variations are often observed even in the same HPV genotype,
the detection sensitivity of the available methods is variable depending on the
HPV genotypes and the viral DNA copy number in the samples examined. The
capability for the detection of multiple infections and the ability to perform
genotyping differ between the methods. The aim of this review is to summarize the
methods used for the diagnosis and follow-up of HPV infections, and to share the 
current informations that may be helpfull for the choice of appropriate method.
For this purpose, molecular-based HPV tests that were used in the past and their 
development processes were described briefly, then currently accepted and widely 
used methods for diagnosis, screening, and typing were discussed in detail, along
with their advantages and disadvantages.


PMID: 25492665  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
