

365. Zhonghua Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2013 Mar;48(3):241-3.

[Clinical manifestation of Kaposi sarcoma in otorhinolaryngology head and neck
surgery].

[Article in Chinese]

Yu DX(1), Pi SJ, Zhang WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Zaozhuang Municipal Hospital, Zaozhuang,
Shandong Province, Zaozhuang 277100, China. africasimba@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To improve the knowledge of Kaposi sarcoma and the relationship
between Kaposi sarcoma and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, and to
improve the ability to diagnose and treat Kaposi sarcoma and acquired immune
deficiency syndrome (AIDS).
METHODS: Symptoms, signs and results of 121 patients encountered in the
department of otorhinolaryngology head and neck surgery in Tanzania, who was
diagnosed as Kaposi sarcoma actually with HIV infection and AIDS, were
retrospectively analyzed in this study.
RESULTS: There were 46 males and 75 females with age ranged from 5 to 65 years,
medium 30 year. The mucous membranes and skin lesions was the most commonly seen 
clinical manifestation in 121 cases, these lesions appeared as raised blotches or
lumps that might be purple, brown, or red, early stages typical lesions began as 
flat or slightly raised colored spots. Among the cases reported here, 25 patients
(20.66%) showed progressive nose blockage and nose bleeding and the purple-red
new-grows were found in the nose of these patients. Fifteen patients (12.40%) had
flat or slightly raised colored spots in their mucous membrane of mouth (palate
or tongue), and in other 7 patients, purple small lumps were found in the gums of
the patients. There were same lesions in their pharynx in 9 cases. In 10 patients
(8.26%), Kaposi sarcoma was found in tonsil looked like tonsillitis with enlarged
tonsils by two to three degree. Twelve patients (9.92%) had masses in the neck
with no pain. Thirty-five patients (28.92%)had lesions of purple black nodules,
including 10 patients who had the same lesions with ulcer formation in the
nodules. All patients had been followed-up for at least two-years. Eighty-five
patients passed away in one year, survival rate of one year was 21.48% (26/121), 
only 12 patients survived from the disease over two years, two years' survival
rate was 9.92% (12/121).
CONCLUSIONS: Kaposi sarcoma is the characteristic disease for AIDS, mainly found 
on the membranes and skin. These lesions appears as raised blotches or lumps that
may be purple, brown, or red, early stages typical lesions begin as flat or
slightly raised colored spots. Patients who had kaposi sarcoma often died in a
short-time without treatment.


PMID: 23755792  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
