

368. J Virol. 2013 Jun;87(11):6062-72. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00330-13. Epub 2013 Mar 27.

The evolving field of human papillomavirus receptor research: a review of binding
and entry.

Raff AB(1), Woodham AW, Raff LM, Skeate JG, Yan L, Da Silva DM, Schelhaas M, Kast
WM.

Author information: 
(1)Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.

Human papillomaviruses (HPVs) infect epithelia and can lead to the development of
lesions, some of which have malignant potential. HPV type 16 (HPV16) is the most 
oncogenic genotype and causes various types of cancer, including cervical, anal, 
and head and neck cancers. However, despite significant research, our
understanding of the mechanism by which HPV16 binds to and enters host cells
remains fragmented. Over several decades, many HPV receptors and entry pathways
have been described. This review puts those studies into context and offers a
model of HPV16 binding and entry as a framework for future research. Our model
suggests that HPV16 binds to heparin sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) on either the 
epithelial cell surface or basement membrane through interactions with the L1
major capsid protein. Growth factor receptors may also become activated through
HSPG/growth factor/HPV16 complexes that initiate signaling cascades during early 
virion-host cell interactions. After binding to HSPGs, the virion undergoes
conformational changes, leading to isomerization by cyclophilin B and proprotein 
convertase-mediated L2 minor capsid protein cleavage that increases L2 N terminus
exposure. Along with binding to HSPGs, HPV16 binds to Î±6 integrins, which
initiate further intracellular signaling events. Following these primary binding 
events, HPV16 binds to a newly identified L2-specific receptor, the annexin A2
heterotetramer. Subsequently, clathrin-, caveolin-, lipid raft-, flotillin-,
cholesterol-, and dynamin-independent endocytosis of HPV16 occurs.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00330-13 
PMCID: PMC3648114
PMID: 23536685  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
