

374. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 17;9(3):e91761. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091761. eCollection
2014.

Prevalence and risk factors for oral HPV infection in young Australians.

Antonsson A(1), Cornford M(2), Perry S(1), Davis M(1), Dunne MP(2), Whiteman
DC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Population Health, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute,
Brisbane, Australia.
(2)School of Public Health and Social Work, Queensland University of Technology, 
Brisbane, Australia.

The prevalence of human papillomavirus (HPV)-associated head and neck cancers is 
increasing, but the prevalence of oral HPV infection in the wider community
remains unknown. We sought to determine the prevalence of, and identify risk
factors for, oral HPV infection in a sample of young, healthy Australians. For
this study, we recruited 307 Australian university students (18-35 years).
Participants reported anonymously about basic characteristics, sexual behaviour, 
and alcohol, tobacco and illicit drugs use. We collected oral rinse samples from 
all participants for HPV testing and typing. Seven of 307 (2.3%) students tested 
positive for oral HPV infection (3 HPV-18, one each of HPV-16, -67, -69, -90),
and six of them were males (p = 0.008). Compared to HPV negative students, those 
with oral HPV infection were more likely to have received oral sex from more
partners in their lifetime (p = 0.0004) and in the last year (p = 0.008). We
found no statistically significant associations with alcohol consumption, smoking
or numbers of partners for passionate kissing or sexual intercourse. In
conclusion, oral HPV infection was associated with male gender and receiving oral
sex in our sample of young Australians.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091761 
PMCID: PMC3956721
PMID: 24637512  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
