

397. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2013 Feb;270(2):661-7. doi: 10.1007/s00405-012-2039-y.
Epub 2012 May 16.

The clinical impact of p16 status in fine-needle aspirates of cervical lymph node
metastasis of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas.

Jakscha J(1), Zlobec I, Storck C, Obermann EC, Tornillo L, Terracciano LM,
Fischer CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital,
Petersgraben 4, 4031 Basel, Switzerland.

Lymph node involvement is prognostically the most determinant clinical factor for
patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs). Ultrasound of the 
neck and fine-needle aspiration (FNA) cytology is one of the first diagnostic
procedures and the most accurate diagnostic staging tool for the neck. Patients
with HPV-positive oropharyngeal carcinomas (OPSCC) show a significantly better
prognosis when compared with HPV-negative OPSCC. P16 overexpression is accepted
as surrogate marker for HPV-positive in OPSCC. These HPV/p16-positive OPSCC are
localized either in the palatal tonsils or the base of tongue and frequently
present with lymph node metastases. We analyzed the correlation and reliability
of p16 expression of the FNA of the lymph node metastasis with the
immunohistochemical expression of p16 of the same lymph node metastasis and its
corresponding primary tumor, as it could be of importance for determining the
localization and different prognosis of the primary tumor. 54 HNSCC patients were
evaluated, p16 expression of the primary tumors and their lymph node metastases
correlated precisely. In 25 of the 54 HNSCC patients, a FNA of the lymph node
metastases was taken before the treatment. The positive cytological and
immunohistochemical p16 staining correlated exactly. Of the 17 histologically
p16-negative lymph node metastases 15 FNA were p16-negative, whereas two samples 
were p16-positive. In our view, a cytological p16 analysis of cervical lymph node
metastasis can facilitate the correct localization of the primary tumor and
discriminate reliably HPV-positive OPSCC from HPV-negative HNSCC with their
significantly diverse prognosis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-012-2039-y 
PMID: 22588195  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
