

398. PLoS Pathog. 2018 Dec 10;14(12):e1007416. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007416.
eCollection 2018 Dec.

STAT6 degradation and ubiquitylated TRIML2 are essential for activation of human 
oncogenic herpesvirus.

Gu F(1), Wang C(1), Wei F(2), Wang Y(1), Zhu Q(1), Ding L(1), Xu W(3), Zhu C(1), 
Cai C(1), Qian Z(3), Yuan Z(1), Robertson E(4), Cai Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)MOE& MOH Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology, School of Basic
Medicine, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, P. R. China.
(2)ShengYushou Center of Cell Biology and Immunology, School of Life Sciences and
Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, P. R. China.
(3)Unit of Herpesvirus and Molecular Virology, Key Laboratory of Molecular
Virology &Immunology, Institute Pasteur of Shanghai, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, P. R. China.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Department of
Microbiology, Abramson Comprehensive Cancer Center, Perelman School of Medicine
at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States of America.

Aberrations in STAT6-mediated signaling are linked to the development of multiple
cancer types. Increasing evidence has shown that activation of human oncogenic
herpesvirus lytic replication is crucial for viral tumorigenesis. However, the
role of STAT6 in herpesvirus lytic replication remains elusive. Here, by using
Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) as a model, we revealed that RTA, 
the master regulator of lytic replication, interacts with STAT6 and promotes
lysine 48 (K48) and K63-linked ubiquitylation of STAT6 for degradation via the
proteasome and lysosome systems. Moreover, degradation of STAT6 is dramatically
associated with the increased ubiquitylated form of tripartite motif family like 
2 (TRIML2, a tumor suppressor) for prolonged cell survival and virion production,
which is also commonly observed in lytic activation of Epstein-Barr virus, herpes
simplex virus 1 and cytomegalovirus. These results suggest that degradation of
STAT6 is important for the lytic activation of KSHV and as such, may be an
attractive therapeutic target.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007416 
PMCID: PMC6287816
PMID: 30532138  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
