

4. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2017 Jul;274(7):2675-2683. doi:
10.1007/s00405-017-4503-1. Epub 2017 Mar 11.

Current and future techniques for human papilloma virus (HPV) testing in
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma.

Qureishi A(1), Mawby T(2), Fraser L(2), Shah KA(3), MÃ¸ller H(4), Winter S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford,
England. aliqureishi@googlemail.com.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford,
England.
(3)Department of Histopathology, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford,
England.
(4)Cancer Epidemiology and Population Health, Kings College London, London, UK.

Comment in
    Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2017 Dec;274(12 ):4255-4257.

Despite a reduction in smoking and alcohol consumption, the incidence of
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) is rising. This is attributed to
human papilloma virus (HPV) infection and screening for HPV is now recommended in
all cases of OPSCC. Despite a variety of clinically available tests and new
non-invasive test strategies there is no consensus on which technique is best.
This review reports on current techniques for HPV detection in OPSCC and the
clinical applicability of emerging techniques. Literature searches of Medline,
Embase and clinicaltrials.gov using the search terms 'head and neck neoplasms',
'squamous cell carcinoma' and 'HPV testing' were performed. 45 studies were
identified and included. p16 immunohistochemistry (IHC), HPV DNA in situ
hybridization (ISH) and HPV polymerase chain reaction (PCR) are the commonest
tests to determine HPV status. p16 IHC and HPV DNA PCR are highly sensitive
whilst HPV DNA ISH is more specific, these techniques conventionally utilize
surgical biopsies. New tests using PCR to screen fine needle aspirates, saliva,
brush cytology and serum for HPV are promising but have variable sensitivity and 
specificity. These non-invasive samples avoid the morbidity of surgical biopsies 
and need for tissue blocks; their clinical role in screening and surveillance
remains largely untested. Further work is needed to validate these tests and
define their role.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-017-4503-1 
PMID: 28285422  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
