

401. J Med Virol. 2015 Jan;87(1):162-9. doi: 10.1002/jmv.23963. Epub 2014 Apr 24.

Erythrovirus B19 and autoimmune thyroid diseases. Review of the literature and
pathophysiological hypotheses.

Page C(1), Duverlie G, Sevestre H, Desailloud R.

Author information: 
(1)ENT and Nead & Neck Surgery Department, University Hospital of Amiens, Amiens,
France.

Erythrovirus B19 (EVB19) has been incriminated, over recent years, in the onset
and/or pathogenesis of many diseases, especially autoimmune thyroid diseases.
This review of the literature (published over the last 40 years using Pubmed and 
Science Direct search engines) was designed to define the role of EVB19,
particularly in autoimmune thyroid diseases.Two cases of subacute thyroiditis,
one case of Graves' disease (associated with type 1 diabetes and rheumatoid
arthritis), and one case of Hashimoto's thyroiditis following acute EVB19
infection were reported. A retrospective case-control study in a pediatric
population demonstrated the role of EVB19 in Hashimoto's thyroiditis. Four
retrospective studies of pathology slides (including PCR, immunohistochemistry or
in situ hybridization) and a prospective case-control study on pathology slides
demonstrated the presence of EVB19 in thyroid tissue of patients with benign
multinodular goiter, Graves' disease, autoimmune thyroiditis (including
Hashimoto's thyroiditis), and thyroid cancer. EVB19 can be demonstrated in the
thyroid gland in a wide range of diseases. Although acute EVB19 infection could
theoretically trigger autoimmune thyroid disease, there is currently no evidence 
that EVB19 plays a specific role in the pathophysiology of autoimmune thyroid
diseases.

Â© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.23963 
PMID: 24760746  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
