

403. Virol J. 2013 Nov 12;10:334. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-10-334.

Evidence of the causal role of human papillomavirus type 58 in an oropharyngeal
carcinoma.

Baboci L, Boscolo-Rizzo P, Holzinger D, Bertorelle R, Biasini L, Michel A,
Schmitt M, Spinato G, Bussani R, Alemany L, Tirelli G, Da Mosto MC, Del Mistro
A(1), Pawlita M.

Author information: 
(1)Veneto Institute of Oncology IOV - IRCCS, Immunology and Molecular Oncology
Unit, Via Gattamelata, 64, Padua 35128-I, Italy. annarosa.delmistro@ioveneto.it.

Persistent human papillomavirus infection (HPV) is recognized as an important
etiologic factor for a subset of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (SCC),
especially those arising from the oropharynx. Whereas HPV16 accounts for the
majority of HPV DNA-positive oropharyngeal SCC, infections with other mucosal
high-risk HPV types are quite rare and biological data demonstrating their causal
involvement are insufficient. Here we present the first case of an oropharyngeal 
SCC driven by HPV type 58. A 69-year-old Caucasian woman presented with an
enlarged and firm left tonsil. A computed tomography scan showed a left tonsillar
mass, extending to the soft palate and the glossotonsillar sulcus. The patient
underwent extended radical tonsillectomy and ipsilateral selective neck
dissection. Pathology confirmed an infiltrating, poorly differentiated SCC of the
left tonsil with node metastasis (pT2N1). Adjuvant external beam radiation
therapy (60 Grays (Gy)) was administered. After 1 year of follow-up, the patient 
is well with no evidence of cancer recurrence. HPV analyses of the tumor tissue
by BSGP5+/6+ -PCR/MPG, targeting 51 mucosal HPV types, showed single positivity
for HPV type 58. Presence of HPV58 E6*I RNA demonstrated biological activity of
the virus in the tumor tissue, and presence of serum antibodies to HPV58
oncoproteins E6 and E7 indicated presence of an HPV58-driven cancer.
Overexpression of cellular protein p16INK4a and reduced expression of pRb, two
cellular markers for HPV-induced cell transformation, were observed. Exons 4-10
of TP53 showed no mutations or polymorphisms. The presence of HPV58 as single HPV
infection in combination with a broad variety of direct and indirect markers of
HPV transformation provides comprehensive evidence that this oropharyngeal SCC
was driven by HPV58.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-10-334 
PMCID: PMC3842782
PMID: 24220072  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
