

405. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 24;9(11):e113584. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113584.
eCollection 2014.

Risk factors for aggressive recurrent respiratory papillomatosis in adults and
juveniles.

Omland T(1), Akre H(1), Lie KA(2), Jebsen P(2), Sandvik L(3), BrÃ¸ndbo K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, Oslo University
Hospital, Oslo, Norway; University of Oslo, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Oslo,
Norway.
(2)Department of Pathology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway;
University of Oslo, Faculty of Dentistry, Oslo, Norway.

In this cohort study we examined whether gender, age at onset, observation time
or human papillomavirus (HPV) genotype are risk factors for an aggressive
clinical course in Recurrent Respiratory Papillomatosis (RRP). Clinical data from
patient records comprised gender, age at onset, date of first endolaryngeal
procedure with biopsy, date of last follow-up, total number of endolaryngeal
procedures, and complications during the observation period. Disease was defined 
as juvenile (JoRRP) or adult onset (AoRRP) according to whether the disease was
acquired before or after the age of 18. Aggressive disease was defined as distal 
spread, tracheostomy, four surgical operations annually or >10 surgeries in
total. DNA was extracted from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue. HPV
genotyping was performed by quantitative PCR assay identifying 15 HPV genotypes. 
The study included 224 patients. The majority were males (141/174 in AoRRPs and
31/50 in JoRRPs; p = 0.005). The median follow-up from initial diagnosis was 12.0
years (IQR 3.7-32.9) for JoRRPs and 4.0 years (IQR 0.8-11.7) for AoRRPs. The
disease was more aggressive in juveniles than adults (p<0.001), a difference that
disappeared after 10 years' observation. JoRRPs with aggressive disease were
younger at onset (mean difference 4.6 years, 95%CI [2.4, 6.8], p = 0.009). HPV6
or -11 was present in all HPV-positive papillomas. HPV11 was more prevalent in
aggressive disease, and HPV6 in non-aggressive disease (p<0.001). Multiple
logistic regression revealed that only age at onset (OR = 0.69, 95% CI [0.53,
0.88], p = 0.003) was associated with aggressive disease in juveniles, while
HPV11 (OR = 3.74, 95% CI [1.40, 9.97], p = 0.008) and observation time >10 years 
(OR = 13.41, 95% CI [5.46, 32.99[, p<001) were risk factors in adults. In
conclusion, the only significant risk factor for developing aggressive disease in
JoRRPs was age at onset, but both HPV11 and observation time >10 years were risk 
factors for an aggressive disease course in AoRRPs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113584 
PMCID: PMC4242649
PMID: 25419846  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
