

409. Cancer Gene Ther. 2009 Sep;16(9):723-30. doi: 10.1038/cgt.2009.19. Epub 2009 Apr 
10.

Phase I and biodistribution study of recombinant adenovirus vector-mediated
herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase gene and ganciclovir administration in
patients with head and neck cancer and other malignant tumors.

Xu F(1), Li S, Li XL, Guo Y, Zou BY, Xu R, Liao H, Zhao HY, Zhang Y, Guan ZZ,
Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in Southern China, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, PR China.

In this study, we investigated the safety and efficacy in cancer patients of a
single intra-tumor injection of recombinant adenovirus vector-mediated herpes
simplex virus thymidine kinase gene (AdV/TK) followed by systemic administration 
of ganciclovir (GCV). In 18 patients with malignant tumors refractory to standard
treatment, AdV/TK was injected on day 1 with dose escalation from 2.5 x 10(11) to
1 x 10(12) virus particles (VP), and GCV (5 mg kg(-1)) was delivered
intravenously every 12 h from days 2 to 15. The most common treatment-related
toxicities were transient fever (10/18) and local injection site reaction
(10/18), and most adverse events were WHO grade I/II. Anti-adenovirus antibody
levels increased continuously during treatment, but anti-HSV antibody levels
remained stable. One patient had a PR at the injection site but PD was found in
the primary site (lung cancer), one patient with fibrosarcoma of the neck had an 
MR, five patients had SD, and 10 patients had PD. In conclusion, AdV/TK followed 
by GCV can be administered safely to Chinese cancer patients, and achieved a
local response with few environmental effects. Because the response was
localized, single regional tumor relapse, especially after radiation, may be an
indication for this suicide gene therapy.

DOI: 10.1038/cgt.2009.19 
PMID: 19363470  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
