

41. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2014 Nov;14(8):1033-40. doi: 10.1586/14737159.2014.960519. 
Epub 2014 Sep 15.

miRNAs in human papilloma virus associated oral and oropharyngeal squamous cell
carcinomas.

Salazar C(1), Calvopi√±a D, Punyadeera C.

Author information: 
(1)Saliva Translational Research Group, The Translational Research Institute, The
University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Level 6, 37 Kent St,
Woolloongabba, QLD 4102, Australia.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most common cancer in 
the world with 600,000 new cases diagnosed annually. Tobacco and alcohol use have
been associated as the principal etiological factors of this pathogenesis. The
incidence of smoking-associated HNSCC has declined, while human papilloma virus
(HPV)-associated HNSCC is on the rise. There are currently no clinically
validated biomarkers to detect this cancer at an early stage (cancers independent
of HPV status). It is well-established that the aberrant expression of miRNAs can
lead to tumorigenesis. miRNA expression differences have also been demonstrated
in HPV-positive and HPV-negative HNSCC tumor tissues as well as in body fluids.
Therefore, miRNAs have the potential to provide an unprecedented insight into the
pathogenesis of HNSCC and serve as potential biomarkers. This review addresses
HNSCC disease burden and the regulation of miRNA by HPV viral oncoproteins,
potential miRNA biomarkers and future perspectives. miRNA provides an unique
opportunity to fulfill the current clinical challenge in HNSCC patient management
by enabling early detection followed by targeted interventions, leading to a
significant reduction in mortality and morbidity.

DOI: 10.1586/14737159.2014.960519 
PMID: 25222489  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
