

411. Oral Dis. 2012 Nov;18(8):809-15. doi: 10.1111/j.1601-0825.2012.01950.x. Epub 2012
Jul 2.

Association of HPV infections with second primary tumors in early-staged oral
cavity cancer.

Huang SF(1), Li HF, Liao CT, Wang HM, Chen IH, Chang JT, Chen YJ, Cheng AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan,
Taiwan.

OBJECTIVE: The infection of human papilloma virus (HPV) has been reported in head
and neck cancer; however, the clinical significance of HPV infection on the
pathogenesis of oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is still uncertain.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study recruited 103 patients with pathological
early-stage OSCC between March 1997 and December 2003 from Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital, Taiwan. Tumor specimens were HPV-genotyped by the EasychipVR HPV Blot
method. Clinical association study was performed by using chi-square,
Kaplan-Meier, and logrank tests.
RESULTS: Thirty-one patients (30.1%) were positive for HPV infection. The most
frequent HPV types were types 16 (16 patients, 51.6%) and 18 (seven patients,
22.6%). HPV infection was not associated with tumor aggressiveness (pathological 
tumor stage or differentiation status), risk exposure (alcohol, cigarette, or
areca quid chewing habit), or the treatment outcome (disease-free survival or
overall survival). However, infection with HPV-18 was associated with the
occurrence of a second primary cancers (P = 0.033), indicating the infection of
HPV in OSCC enhances the susceptibility of developing secondary malignancy.
CONCLUSIONS: There are 30% of the patients with OSCC infected with HPV, with most
high-risk types. HPV-18 infection may enhance the susceptibility of second
primary tumors. Large scale of validation study will be needed to confirm this
result.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1601-0825.2012.01950.x 
PMID: 22747969  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
