

413. J Virol. 2009 Nov;83(22):11784-94. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01370-09. Epub 2009 Sep 9.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) type 18 induces extended growth in primary human
cervical, tonsillar, or foreskin keratinocytes more effectively than other
high-risk mucosal HPVs.

Lace MJ(1), Anson JR, Klingelhutz AJ, Lee JH, Bossler AD, Haugen TH, Turek LP.

Author information: 
(1)Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 601 Highway 6 West, Iowa City, IA 52246, USA.
michael-lace@uiowa.edu

Mucosal high-risk (HR) human papillomaviruses (HPVs) that cause cervical and
other anogenital cancers also are found in approximately 25% of head and neck
carcinomas (HNCs), especially those arising in the oropharynx and the tonsils.
While many HR HPV types are common in anogenital cancer, over 90% of HPV-positive
HNCs harbor HPV type 16 (HPV-16). Using a quantitative colony-forming assay, we
compared the ability of full-length mucosal HPV genomes, i.e., the low-risk
HPV-11 and HR HPV-16, -18, and -31, to persist in and alter the growth of primary
human keratinocytes from the foreskin, cervix, and tonsils. The HR HPV types led 
to the formation of growing keratinocyte colonies in culture independent of the
site of epithelial origin. However, HPV-18 induced colony growth in all
keratinocytes >4-fold more effectively than HPV-16 or HPV-31 and >20-fold more
efficiently than HPV-11 or controls. HPV-11-transfected or control colonies
failed to expand beyond 32 to 36 population doublings postexplantation. In
contrast, individual HR HPV-transfected clones exhibited no apparent slowdown of 
growth or "crisis," and many maintained HPV plasmid persistence beyond 60
population doublings. Keratinocyte clones harboring extrachromosomal HR HPV
genomes had shorter population doubling times and formed dysplastic stratified
epithelia in organotypic raft cultures, mirroring the pathological features of
higher-grade intraepithelial lesions, yet did not exhibit chromosomal
instability. We conclude that, in culture, the HR HPV type, rather than the site 
of epithelial origin of the cells, determines the efficacy of inducing continued 
growth of individual keratinocytes, with HPV-18 being the most aggressive mucosal
HR HPV type tested.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01370-09 
PMCID: PMC2772696
PMID: 19740985  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
