

418. Oral Oncol. 2012 Aug;48(8):717-22. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2012.02.001. Epub 
2012 Feb 25.

Correlation of a priori DCE-MRI and (1)H-MRS data with molecular markers in neck 
nodal metastases: Initial analysis.

Jansen JF(1), Carlson DL, Lu Y, Stambuk HE, Moreira AL, Singh B, Patel SG, Kraus 
DH, Wong RJ, Shaha AR, Shah JP, Shukla-Dave A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Physics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY, USA.

The aim of the present study is to correlate non-invasive, pretreatment
biological imaging (dynamic contrast enhanced-MRI [DCE-MRI] and proton magnetic
resonance spectroscopy [(1)H-MRS]) findings with specific molecular marker data
in neck nodal metastases of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC)
patients. Pretreatment DCE-MRI and (1)H-MRS were performed on neck nodal
metastases of 12 patients who underwent surgery. Surgical specimens were analyzed
with immunohistochemistry (IHC) assays for: Ki-67 (reflecting cellular
proliferation), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) (the "endogenous
marker" of tumor vessel growth), carbonic anhydrase (CAIX), hypoxia inducible
transcription factor (HIF-1α), and human papillomavirus (HPV). Additionally,
necrosis was estimated based on H&E staining. The Spearman correlation was used
to compare DCE-MRI, (1)H-MRS, and molecular marker data. A significant
correlation was observed between DCE-MRI parameter std(k(ep)) and VEGF IHC
expression level (rho=0.81, p=0.0001). Furthermore, IHC expression levels of
Ki-67 inversely correlated with std(K(trans)) and std(v(e)) (rho=-0.71; p=0.004, 
and rho=-0.73; p=0.003, respectively). Other DCE-MRI, (1)H-MRS and IHC values did
not show significant correlation. The results of this preliminary study indicate 
that the level of heterogeneity of perfusion in metastatic HNSCC seems positively
correlated with angiogenesis, and inversely correlated with proliferation. These 
results are preliminary in nature and are indicative, and not definitive, trends 
portrayed in HNSCC patients with nodal disease. Future studies with larger
patient populations need to be carried out to validate and clarify our
preliminary findings.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2012.02.001 
PMCID: PMC3368067
PMID: 22366441  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
