

43. PLoS One. 2017 Nov 14;12(11):e0187532. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0187532.
eCollection 2017.

STING expression and response to treatment with STING ligands in premalignant and
malignant disease.

Baird JR(1), Feng Z(2), Xiao HD(3), Friedman D(1), Cottam B(1), Fox BA(1), Kramer
G(1), Leidner RS(1), Bell RB(1)(4), Young KH(1)(5), Crittenden MR(1)(5), Gough
MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Earle A. Chiles Research Institute, Robert W. Franz Cancer Center, Providence 
Portland Medical Center, Portland, OR, United States of America.
(2)Oregon Health and Sciences University, Portland, OR, United States of America.
(3)Pathology, Providence Portland Medical Center, Portland, OR, United States of 
America.
(4)The Head and Neck Surgical Institute, Portland, OR, United States of America.
(5)The Oregon Clinic, Portland, OR, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2018 Feb 15;13(2):e0192988.

Human papilloma virus positive (HPV+) tumors represent a large proportion of
anal, vulvar, vaginal, cervical and head and neck squamous carcinomas (HNSCC) and
late stage invasive disease is thought to originate from a premalignant state.
Cyclic dinucleotides that activate STimulator of INterferon Genes (STING) have
been shown to cause rapid regression of a range of advanced tumors. We aimed to
investigate STING ligands as a novel treatment for papilloma. We tested therapies
in a spontaneous mouse model of papilloma of the face and anogenital region that 
histologically resembles human HPV-associated papilloma. We demonstrate that
STING ligands cause rapid regression of papilloma, associated with T cell
infiltration, and are significantly more effective than Imiquimod, a current
immunotherapy for papilloma. In humans, we show that STING is expressed in the
basal layer of normal skin and lost during keratinocyte differentiation. We found
STING was expressed in all HPV-associated cervical and anal dysplasia and was
strongly expressed in the cancer cells of HPV+ HNSCC but not in HPV-unrelated
HNSCC. We found no strong association between STING expression and progressive
disease in non-HPV oral dysplasia and oral pre-malignancies that are not
HPV-related. These data demonstrate that STING is expressed in basal cells of the
skin and is retained in HPV+ pre-malignancies and advanced cancers, but not in
HPV-unrelated HNSCC. However, using a murine HNSCC model that does not express
STING, we demonstrate that STING ligands are an effective therapy regardless of
expression of STING by the cancer cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0187532 
PMCID: PMC5685615
PMID: 29135982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
