

432. Clin Transl Oncol. 2009 Jun;11(6):340-8.

Cervical lymph node metastases of squamous cell carcinoma from an unknown primary
site: a favourable prognosis subset of patients with CUP.

Pavlidis N(1), Pentheroudakis G, Plataniotis G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Ioannina University Hospital, 45500 Ioannina, 
Greece. npavlid@uoi.gr

Squamous cervical cancer of unknown primary site (SQCCUP) presents in patients as
neck lymph nodes involved by squamous carcinoma in the absence of identifiable
primary in the head, neck or lung. This CUP subset affects male patients
previously exposed to alcohol and tobacco, though a proportion of cases may be
related to chronic infection of the oropharynx by human papilloma virus. A
standardised diagnostic work-up consisting of panendoscopy of the upper
aerodigestive tract, CT of the chest/abdomen and histology supplemented by
immunohistochemistry is warranted for the diagnosis. The scant available evidence
on the molecular biology of the disease is reviewed. The cornerstones of
management are excisional biopsy or surgical extirpation of the disease followed 
by bilateral neck external beam radiotherapy and chemotherapy. The necessity for 
complete surgical resection of involved neck nodes, irradiation of all head/neck 
mucosal sites and administration of concurrent chemotherapy is currently being
debated. Aggressive multimodal therapy results in longterm disease control in
50-60% of patients, though data are mainly based on retrospective cohorts.
Factors predicting for superior patient outcome are radical management with
surgery or radiotherapy, low stage and volume of disease, absence of
extracapsular spread and good performance status. Recently introduced molecular
profiling platforms may provide biological classification to a primary tissue of 
origin as well as insights into the pathophysiology of this clinical entity.


PMID: 19531448  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
