

436. Brain Nerve. 2009 Jul;61(7):815-22.

[Oncolytic virus therapy for malignant brain tumors].

[Article in Japanese]

Ino Y(1), Todo T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery and Translational Research Center, The University
of Tokyo Hospital, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyoku, Tokyo 113 8655, Japan.

Oncolytic viruses are genetically engineered, recombinant viruses or naturally
occurring, attenuated viruses that infect, replicate selectively within, and
destroy tumor cells. These viruses are nontoxic to normal tissues, and progeny
viruses released from destroyed tumor cells can spread and infect surrounding
tumor cells. In addition, most oncolytic viruses can elicit specific antitumor
immunity in the course of tumor cell destruction. Currently, the main route of
virus administration is direct intratumoral injection that enables maximum virus 
delivery to tumor cells and minimum systemic adverse events. Several types of
oncolytic viruses have been tested in clinical trials for recurrent malignant
glioma, among which genetically engineered herpes simplex viruses type 1 seems to
be the most promising because of its high tumor selectivity (indicating safety)
and potency (indicating efficacy). Oncolytic virus therapy has been developed for
various types of cancers other than glioma, including malignant melanoma and
prostate, breast, head & neck and colon cancers. Thus far, oncolytic viruses that
are inoculated intratumorally, are shown to be safe; adverse events typically
observed are usually transient and include local inflammation and flu-like
symptoms. Oncolytic viruses can be used in combination with chemotherapy or other
conventional therapies, which, in some cases, can lead to synergistic effects.
This review summarizes the recent advances in clinical and preclinical research
on oncolytic virus therapy for malignant brain tumors.


PMID: 19618859  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
