

437. Zhonghua Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2011 Mar;46(3):232-4.

[Clinical manifestation of HIV infection and AIDS in otorhinolaryngology head and
neck surgery].

[Article in Chinese]

Li YQ(1), Huang J, Zhang WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Zaozhuang Municipal Hospital, Zaozhuang
Shandong Province 277100, China. lyqyq@tom.com

OBJECTIVE: To improve the recognition of clinical manifestation of human
immunodeficiency virus(HIV) infection and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
(AIDS) in otorhinolaryngology head and neck surgery, and to emphasize the early
diagnosis, correct treatment and effective protection.
METHODS: Fifty-five patients with HIV infection and AIDS encountered in the
department of otorhinolaryngology head and neck surgery in Tanzania were included
in this study. There were 23 males and 32 female with age ranged from 3 - 67
years, medium 31 year. The clinical manifestation and prognosis of the patients
were analyzed and summed up.
RESULTS: Parotid glands swelling was the most commonly seen clinical
manifestation in the 55 cases. Among the cases reported here, 17 (30.9%) showed
parotid glands swelling, 19 (34.5%) had Kaposi's sarcoma in nasal cavity or oral 
cavity or pharynx, 12(21.8%) were accompanied with chronic suppurative otitis
media, 11 (20.0%) had masses in the neck, 7 (12.7%) had masses in the pharynx, 6 
(10.9%) were seen to have ulcer in oral and pharyngeal mucosa, 2 (3.6%) showed
infection due to candidaalbicans. The infection in most cases could be controlled
and symptoms relieved, but recurrence could occur over time and got worse
gradually.
CONCLUSIONS: Many patients with HIV infection and AIDS first see a doctor in
otorhinolaryngology head and neck surgery. Patients who had the above clinical
manifestations in repeated poor results should be observed carefully, early
diagnosis and treatment are important to prevent transmission, prolong life and
maximize the quality of life of the patients.


PMID: 21575416  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
