

443. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2011 Feb;31(2):227-36. doi: 10.1089/jir.2010.0055.
Epub 2010 Sep 28.

Porcine type I interferon rapidly protects swine against challenge with multiple 
serotypes of foot-and-mouth disease virus.

Dias CC(1), Moraes MP, Segundo FD, de los Santos T, Grubman MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Plum Island Animal Disease Center, Agricultural Research Service, US
Department of Agriculture, Greenport, New York 11944, USA.

Foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV) causes a highly contagious disease of
cloven-hoofed animals. Current inactivated vaccines require approximately 7 days 
to induce protection, but before this time vaccinated animals remain susceptible 
to disease. Previously, we demonstrated that intramuscular (IM) inoculation of a 
replication-defective human adenovirus type 5 (Ad5) vector containing a porcine
interferon α gene (pIFNα) can protect swine challenged 1 day later by intradermal
(ID) injection with FMDV A24 Cruzeiro from both clinical disease and virus
replication. To extend these studies to other FMDV serotypes, we demonstrated the
effectiveness of Ad5-pIFNα against ID challenge with O1 Manisa and Asia-1 and
against A24 Cruzeiro in a direct contact challenge model. We also showed that an 
Ad5 vector containing the pIFNβ gene can protect swine against ID challenge with 
A24 Cruzeiro. Further, IM inoculation of a 10-fold lower dose of Ad5-pIFNα at 4
sites in the neck compared with 1 site in the hind limb can protect swine against
ID challenge. These studies demonstrate the ability of Ad5-delivered type I IFN
to rapidly protect swine against several FMDV serotypes and suggest that various 
modifications of this approach may enable this strategy to be successfully used
in other FMD susceptible species.

DOI: 10.1089/jir.2010.0055 
PMID: 20874428  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
