

445. J Biol Chem. 2011 Nov 25;286(47):40681-92. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.300673. Epub
2011 Sep 30.

Mutagenesis of surfactant protein D informed by evolution and x-ray
crystallography enhances defenses against influenza A virus in vivo.

Crouch E(1), Nikolaidis N, McCormack FX, McDonald B, Allen K, Rynkiewicz MJ,
Cafarella TM, White M, Lewnard K, Leymarie N, Zaia J, Seaton BA, Hartshorn KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA. crouch@path.wustl.edu

The recognition of influenza A virus (IAV) by surfactant protein D (SP-D) is
mediated by interactions between the SP-D carbohydrate recognition domains (CRD) 
and glycans displayed on envelope glycoproteins. Although native human SP-D shows
potent antiviral and aggregating activity, trimeric recombinant neck+CRDs (NCRDs)
show little or no capacity to influence IAV infection. A mutant trimeric NCRD,
D325A/R343V, showed marked hemagglutination inhibition and viral neutralization, 
with viral aggregation and aggregation-dependent viral uptake by neutrophils.
D325A/R343V exhibited glucose-sensitive binding to Phil82 hemagglutinin trimer
(HA) by surface plasmon resonance. By contrast, there was very low binding to the
HA trimer from another virus (PR8) that lacks glycans on the HA head. Mass
spectrometry demonstrated the presence of high mannose glycans on the Phil82 HA
at positions known to contribute to IAV binding. Molecular modeling predicted an 
enhanced capacity for bridging interactions between HA glycans and D325A/R343V.
Finally, the trimeric D325A/R343V NCRD decreased morbidity and increased viral
clearance in a murine model of IAV infection using a reassortant A/WSN/33 virus
with a more heavily glycosylated HA. The combined data support a model in which
altered binding by a truncated mutant SP-D to IAV HA glycans facilitates viral
aggregation, leading to significant viral neutralization in vitro and in vivo.
These studies demonstrate the potential utility of homology modeling and protein 
structure analysis for engineering effective collectin antivirals as in vivo
therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.300673 
PMCID: PMC3220461
PMID: 21965658  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
