

447. Pathol Res Pract. 2011 Dec 15;207(12):758-61. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2011.09.013.
Epub 2011 Nov 4.

TP53 gene expression in HPV-positive oral tongue SCC and its correlation with
nodal metastasis.

Seraj JM(1), Yazdani N, Ashtiani ZO, Seraj SM, Hasheminasab SM, Memar B,
Mirashrafi F, Borghei H, Yazdani J, Mostaan LV.

Author information: 
(1)Otorhinolaryngology Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran.

In this study, we investigated the prevalence of human papilloma virus (HPV)
infection and TP53 expression in patients with squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of
the tongue and, subsequently, its significance in cervical lymph node metastases 
and tumor differentiation. Sections of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue
blocks from 94 histologically confirmed tongue SCC cases were investigated in
this study. Immunohistochemistry was used to study TP53 expression, and
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed for the detection of high risk HPV 
types (16 and 18). The frequency of HPV-16 and HPV-18 infection was 10.6% and
16%, respectively. Overexpression of TP53 was observed in 70.2% of patients.
Young patients (aged below 45 years) comprised 20% of all patients. There was no 
significant association between TP53, HPV-16, or HPV 18 presence and higher
stages of the tumor, tumor differentiation, or presence of nodal metastasis.
Although an association between head and neck SCC and HPV infection is being
recognized and reported, our data implicate that HPV infection or TP53 expression
does not play a significant role in oral tongue SCC pathogenesis,
differentiation, or metastasis, as seen in our patients.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prp.2011.09.013 
PMID: 22055991  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
