

449. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2010 Jan;298(1):L79-88. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00223.2009. Epub 2009 Oct 16.

Viral aggregating and opsonizing activity in collectin trimers.

Hartshorn KL(1), White MR, Tecle T, Sorensen G, Holmskov U, Crouch EC.

Author information: 
(1)Boston University School of Medicine, EBRC 414, 650 Albany St., Boston, MA
02118, USA. khartsho@bu.edu

Collectins are collagenous lectins present in blood, respiratory lining fluid,
and other mucosal secretions that play important roles in innate defense against 
infection. The collectin, surfactant protein D (SP-D), limits infection by
viruses and bacteria in the respiratory tract, eye, and female genital tract.
Multimeric SP-D has strong antiviral activity and is a potent viral and bacterial
agglutinin and opsonin; however, trimers composed of the neck and carbohydrate
recognition domain (hSP-D-NCRD) of SP-D lack these activities. We now show that, 
in contrast, a trimeric neck and CRD construct of bovine serum collectin CL-46
induces aggregation of influenza A virus (IAV) and potently increases IAV uptake 
by neutrophils. CL-46-NCRD showed calcium-dependent and sugar-sensitive binding
to both neutrophils and IAV. Replacement of specific residues of the CRD of human
SP-D with those found in bovine serum collectins conferred opsonizing activity.
The most effective substitution involved replacement of arginine 343 with valine 
(hSP-D-NCRD/R343V). hSP-D-NCRD/R343V greatly increased viral uptake by
neutrophils and monocytes and also potentiated neutrophil respiratory burst
responses. These effects were further increased by cross-linking of
hSP-D-NCRD/R343V trimers with MAbs directed against areas of the hSP-D-NCRD not
involved in viral binding. Unlike the wild-type human SP-D hSP-D-NCRD,
hSP-D-NCRD/R343V also induced viral aggregation. These results indicate that
collectins can act as opsonins for IAV even in the absence of the collagen domain
or higher order multimerization. This may involve increased affinity of
individual CRDs for glycoconjugates displayed on host cells or the viral
envelope.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.00223.2009 
PMCID: PMC2806199
PMID: 19837850  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
