

451. J Virol. 2009 Aug;83(15):7457-66. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00285-09. Epub 2009 May 20.

Upstream regulatory region alterations found in human papillomavirus type 16
(HPV-16) isolates from cervical carcinomas increase transcription, ori function, 
and HPV immortalization capacity in culture.

Lace MJ(1), Isacson C, Anson JR, LÃ¶rincz AT, Wilczynski SP, Haugen TH, Turek LP.

Author information: 
(1)Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
michael-lace@uiowa.edu

Human papillomavirus (HPV) DNAs isolated from cervical and head and neck
carcinomas frequently contain nucleotide sequence alterations in the viral
upstream regulatory region (URR). Our study has addressed the role such sequence 
changes may play in the efficiency of establishing HPV persistence and altered
keratinocyte growth. Genomic mapping of integrated HPV type 16 (HPV-16) genomes
from 32 cervical cancers revealed that the viral E6 and E7 oncogenes, as well as 
the L1 region/URR, were intact in all of them. The URR sequences from integrated 
and unintegrated viral DNA were found to harbor distinct sets of nucleotide
substitutions. A subset of the altered URRs increased the potential of HPV-16 to 
establish persistent, cell growth-altering viral-genome replication in the cell. 
This aggressive phenotype in culture was not solely due to increased viral early 
gene transcription, but also to augmented initial amplification of the viral
genome. As revealed in a novel ori-dependent HPV-16 plasmid amplification assay, 
the altered motifs that led to increased viral transcription from the intact
genome also greatly augmented HPV-16 ori function. The nucleotide sequence
changes correlate with those previously described in the distinct geographical
North American type 1 and Asian-American variants that are associated with more
aggressive disease in epidemiologic studies and encompass, but are not limited
to, alterations in previously characterized sites for the negative regulatory
protein YY1. Our results thus provide evidence that nucleotide alterations in HPV
regulatory sequences could serve as potential prognostic markers of
HPV-associated carcinogenesis.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00285-09 
PMCID: PMC2708609
PMID: 19458011  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
