

453. Bull Cancer. 2009 Oct;96(10):941-50. doi: 10.1684/bdc.2009.0923.

[Involvement of human papillomavirus in upper aero-digestive tracts cancers].

[Article in French]

Neufcoeur PE(1), Arafa M, Delvenne P, Saussez S.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Anatomie et de Biologie Cellulaire, Université de Mons-Hainaut, 20
Place du Parc, B-7000 Mons, Belgique, Service d'Anatomopathologie, Université de 
Liège, Place du 20-Août 9, 4000 Liège, Belgique.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) is one of the most common causes of sexually
transmitted infection in the world. France and Belgium present one of the highest
incidence of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) worldwide. Besides,
considering only the male population, HNSCCs represent the fourth most frequent
cancer after prostate, lung and colon cancers. Although the causal link between
high-risk HPVs and cervical carcinoma is well established, the implication of
this viral infection in HNSCC remains debatable. Here, we discuss current
knowledge concerning the HPV implication in HNSCCs. Based on our literature
review, 20 to 25% of HNSCCs could be associated with oncogenic HPVs, in
particular HPV type 16. The oropharynx--more precisely the tonsil--is the head
and neck location presenting the highest incidence of HPV infection. Moreover, a 
clear increase of tonsillar carcinoma incidence has been described. As observed
in cervical carcinomas, HPV positive HNSCCs are sexually transmitted and
characterized by alterations of p53 and pRb signalling pathways. Several studies 
have shown that HPV positive subgroup presented better prognosis particularly if 
these patients overexpressed p16INK4. New studies regarding HPV status in HNSCCs 
are warranted to provide a rationale for large scale HPV vaccination in young
male populations.

DOI: 10.1684/bdc.2009.0923 
PMID: 19744917  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
