

467. Int J Cancer. 2010 Feb 15;126(4):959-75. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24844.

A new multiparameter assay to assess HPV 16/18, viral load and physical status
together with gain of telomerase genes in HPV-related cancers.

Theelen W(1), Reijans M, Simons G, Ramaekers FC, Speel EJ, Hopman AH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, GROW-School for Oncology and
Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical Center, The Netherlands.
wendy.theelen@molcelb.unimaas.nl

Oncogenic human papillomavirus (HPV) is the most important risk factor for cancer
of the uterine cervix and a subgroup of head and neck cancers. Viral load has
been associated with persistence of infection, whereas integration of HPV into
the host cell genome is associated with transition to invasive disease. Viral
integration is frequently correlated with loss of viral E2 and gain of the
telomerase-related genes TERC and TERT. The objective of this study was to
develop a rapid and sensitive multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification
(MLPA) assay for the simultaneous analysis of viral load, integration and copy
number gain of TERC and TERT in HPV16/18-associated lesions. The performance of
the assay was tested for HPV vs. human gene copy number ratios ranging from 0.1
to 100 and for percentages of integration ranging from 0 to 100%. The model
systems used include plasmid mixtures and the HPV-positive cell lines SiHa, HeLa 
and CaSki described to contain a range of 2-600 viral copies per cell. In samples
with low-viral load, viral integration can be reliably determined when more than 
30% of the virus is integrated. Gain of the telomerase-related genes in the cell 
lines as determined by our MLPA assay was in accordance with data reported in the
literature. Our study demonstrates that within a single MLPA-reaction viral type,
load, integration and gain of TERC and TERT can be reliably determined, which
will improve risk assessment for patients suspected for HPV infection.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.24844 
PMID: 19711394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
