

468. Aesthetic Plast Surg. 2010 Aug;34(4):528-30. doi: 10.1007/s00266-009-9467-0. Epub
2010 Jan 28.

Nd:YAG laser-assisted liposuction for an HIV patient.

Onesti MG(1), Fioramonti P, Carella S, Spinelli G, Scuderi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, University of Rome La
Sapienza, Viale delle Provincie 65, Rome, Italy.

Active antiretroviral therapy has reduced the mortality of patients with acquired
immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) and increased both the quality of life and the 
longevity of patients infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). The
long-term effects of HIV infection are increasingly observed, particularly
changes in fat distribution or "lipodystrophy." Strategies to prevent, mitigate, 
or reverse HIV-associated lipodystrophy have been difficult to develop. The
medical management of fat redistribution usually is ineffective, and surgical
approaches to HIV-associated lipodystrophy have already been described, but major
drawbacks include recurrence of the fat accumulation. This report aims to
describe the clinical outcomes for a man with buffalo hump who underwent
lipolaser-assisted liposuction. This technique obtained a significant reduction
in the size of the adiposity and an improvement in the neck's range of motion. At
this writing, after 3 years, the patient is satisfied with his cosmetic and
functional results. The authors believe that lipolaser-assisted liposuction using
the Smartlipo Deka-Mela neodymium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet (Nd:YAG) 1,064-mm-long 
pulse is effective in reducing the cervicodorsal fat pad. The technique is
performed using local anesthesia with low operative risks and minimal surgical
trauma. The treated zone shows rapid healing, and the whole procedure requires a 
day-hospital recovery, thus reducing the costs.

DOI: 10.1007/s00266-009-9467-0 
PMID: 20108090  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
