

469. Cesk Patol. 2013 Apr;49(2):72-5.

Human papillomaviruses are not involved in the etiopathogenesis of salivary gland
tumors.

Skálová A(1), Kašpírková J, Andrle P, Hostička L, Vaneček T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Charles University in Progue, Faculty of Medicine in 
Pilsen, Medical Faculty Hospital, Czech Republic. skalova@fnplzen.cz

BACKGROUND: Tumor-related high risk human papillomaviruses (HPV) 16 and 18 have
been repeatedly detected in head and neck cancers, particularly, they are well
known risk factors in squamous cell carcinoma of the oropharyngeal and tonsillar 
region. Little is known, however, about the possible role of HPV in salivary
gland tumors.
METHODS: Fifty-five cases of benign and malignant salivary gland tumors were
tested using p16 immunohistochemistry followed by HPV DNA polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) using SPF, CPSGB, GP5+/GP6+ primers, and type specific primers for
HPV 16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 45 in the cases with strong immunohistochemical
expression for p16 protein (score 3+).
RESULTS: Only 5 tumors of 55 (9 %) were completely devoid of any p16 staining,
and in 10 cases (18 %), less than 25 % of tumor cells stained (score 1+). In the 
majority of cases (35 of 55; 64 %) there was a patchy nuclear and cytoplasmic
strong staining in 26 to 50 % of tumor cells (score 2+). In five cases (9 %),
strong nuclear and cytoplasmic staining in more than 51% of tumor cells was
detected (score 3+). However, none of the p16-positive cases showed any evidence 
of high-risk HPV by PCR.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the study indicate that HPV, in particular oncogenic 
types 16 and 18, are not involved in the etiology of benign and malignant
epithelial tumors of salivary glands. Therefore, it is likely that salivary gland
tumors belong to the category of tissues in which the p16 positive
immunohistochemistry is not biologically relevant to the oncogenic role of HPV
infection.


PMID: 23641711  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
