

476. Int J Cancer. 2011 Jul 1;129(1):101-10. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25889. Epub 2011 Apr 13.

HPV involvement in tonsillar cancer: prognostic significance and clinically
relevant markers.

Rotnáglová E(1), Tachezy R, Saláková M, Procházka B, Košl'abová E, Veselá E,
Ludvíková V, Hamšíková E, Klozar J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, 1st Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Motol University Hospital, Prague, Czech 
Republic.

The association of high-risk human papillomaviruses (HR HPVs) with tonsillar
cancer (TC) has been documented. Because patients with HPV-associated tumors show
better survival rates, modification of their treatment regimen is being
considered. It is therefore crucial to find markers for the identification of
patients whose tumors are linked to viral infection. A cohort of 109 patients
with primary TC was screened for HPV DNA presence in the tumor tissues and
HPV-specific antibodies in sera. Data regarding risk factors and clinical
parameters were collected. Forty-five specimens were analyzed for the expression 
of viral E6 and E2-region mRNA, and the p16 and p53 protein expression status was
assessed by immunohistochemistry. The overall prevalence of HPV DNA in TC tissues
was 65.1%. Ninety-three percent of HR HPV DNA-positive samples expressed E6*I
mRNA. E2-region mRNA expression was detected in 36% of positive samples, which
implies that the virus is integrated in 64% of HPV DNA/RNA-positive tumors. p16
overexpression and the presence of antibodies specific to HPV16 E6/E7
oncoproteins correlated well with HPV DNA and RNA presence. The disease-specific 
survival rate of patients with HPV DNA-positive tumors was significantly higher
than that of HPV DNA-negative patients. In addition to providing further evidence
of the involvement of HPV infection in the etiopathogenesis of a proportion of TC
cases, our study demonstrates that p16 immunostaining and anti-E6/E7 antibodies
as surrogate markers of HPV involvement represent specific, sensitive and
clinically accessible assays for the identification of TC patients who have a
considerably better prognosis.

Copyright © 2011 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.25889 
PMID: 21190188  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
