

477. Biochemistry. 2013 Nov 26;52(47):8527-38. doi: 10.1021/bi4010683. Epub 2013 Nov
13.

Molecular mechanisms of inhibition of influenza by surfactant protein D revealed 
by large-scale molecular dynamics simulation.

Goh BC(1), Rynkiewicz MJ, Cafarella TR, White MR, Hartshorn KL, Allen K, Crouch
EC, Calin O, Seeberger PH, Schulten K, Seaton BA.

Author information: 
(1)Beckman Institute and Department of Physics, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign , Urbana, Illinois 61801, United States.

Surfactant protein D (SP-D), a mammalian C-type lectin, is the primary innate
inhibitor of influenza A virus (IAV) in the lung. Interactions of SP-D with
highly branched viral N-linked glycans on hemagglutinin (HA), an abundant IAV
envelope protein and critical virulence factor, promote viral aggregation and
neutralization through as yet unknown molecular mechanisms. Two truncated human
SP-D forms, wild-type (WT) and double mutant D325A+R343V, representing neck and
carbohydrate recognition domains are compared in this study. Whereas both WT and 
D325A+R343V bind to isolated glycosylated HA, WT does not inhibit IAV in
neutralization assays; in contrast, D325A+R343V neutralization compares well with
that of full-length native SP-D. To elucidate the mechanism for these biochemical
observations, we have determined crystal structures of D325A+R343V in the
presence and absence of a viral nonamannoside (Man9). On the basis of the
D325A+R343V-Man9 structure and other crystallographic data, models of complexes
between HA and WT or D325A+R343V were produced and subjected to molecular
dynamics. Simulations reveal that whereas WT and D325A+R343V both block the
sialic acid receptor site of HA, the D325A+R343V complex is more stable, with
stronger binding caused by additional hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic interactions
with HA residues. Furthermore, the blocking mechanism of HA differs for WT and
D325A+R343V because of alternate glycan binding modes. The combined results
suggest a mechanism through which the mode of SP-D-HA interaction could
significantly influence viral aggregation and neutralization. These studies
provide the first atomic-level molecular view of an innate host defense lectin
inhibiting its viral glycoprotein target.

DOI: 10.1021/bi4010683 
PMCID: PMC3927399
PMID: 24224757  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
