

478. Gene Ther. 2010 Dec;17(12):1517-24. doi: 10.1038/gt.2010.99. Epub 2010 Aug 5.

Comparison of oncolytic adenoviruses for selective eradication of oral cancer and
pre-cancerous lesions.

van Zeeburg HJ(1), Huizenga A, Brink A, van den Doel PB, Zhu ZB, McCormick F,
Brakenhoff RH, van Beusechem VW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology/Head-Neck Surgery, VU University Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Gene Ther. 2010 Dec;17(12):1421-2.

Oncolytic adenoviruses are being investigated as potential anti-cancer agents.
Selective lytic replication in cancer cells is essential for an effective and
safe treatment. In this study, we compared 11 oncolytic adenoviruses in relevant 
cell cultures to assess their use for treating oral cancer and pre-cancerous
lesions. We determined the cytotoxicity of oncolytic adenovirus infection and
calculated selectivity indices for cytotoxicity to cancer cells compared with
normal oral keratinocytes and fibroblasts. Keratinocytes were very sensitive to
wild-type adenovirus serotype 5 (Ad5); 1- to 3-log more than head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cells. The potencies of oncolytic adenoviruses to
kill HNSCC cells within 7 days after infection ranged from approximately 10 times
less potent to approximately 10 times more potent than Ad5. The selectivity
indices determined on fibroblasts and keratinocytes differed markedly. Two
oncolytic adenoviruses were more selective than Ad5 for HNSCC cells compared with
fibroblasts; and five viruses showed selective replication on HNSCC cells
compared with keratinocytes. Overall, CRAd-S.RGD with E1A driven by the survivin 
promoter and an infectivity-enhancing capsid modification showed the most
favourable cytotoxicity pattern; being very potent in killing HNSCC cells, only
slightly less effective than Ad5 in killing pre-neoplastic keratinocytes and the 
least toxic to normal keratinocytes.

DOI: 10.1038/gt.2010.99 
PMID: 20686507  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
