

479. Int J Cancer. 2012 Sep 1;131(5):1179-86. doi: 10.1002/ijc.26500. Epub 2011 Nov
19.

Characteristics and survival of head and neck cancer by HPV status: a cancer
registry-based study.

Sethi S(1), Ali-Fehmi R, Franceschi S, Struijk L, van Doorn LJ, Quint W,
Albashiti B, Ibrahim M, Kato I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit,
MI 48201, USA.

Elucidation of the role of human papillomavirus (HPV) in the etiology and
prognosis of squamous carcinomas of the head and neck (HNSCC) is essential to
optimize prevention and treatment strategies for this disease. We analyzed 385
HNSCC tissue blocks identified through a population-based cancer registry in
Metropolitan Detroit for HPV DNA using a broad-spectrum PCR technique
(SPF10-LiPA25) to correlate with patient and tumor characteristics and overall
survival. Overall, HPV DNA (any type) was detected in 29.4% of all HNSCC, but it 
was significantly more prevalent (50.6%) in oropharyngeal sites (N=81), where 90%
of HPV were type 16, than in other sites. HPV prevalence (any type) in
oropharyngeal sites was highest in patients with a negative smoking indicator,
Caucasians and in regional tumor stage. Likewise, only in oropharyngeal sites did
patients overall positive to HPV show significantly better survival compared with
HPV-negative patients, notably among those who had been irradiated. The best and 
the worst survival from cancer in oropharyngeal sites were found, respectively,
among HPV-positive patients with negative smoking indicator and among
HPV-negative patients with positive smoking indicator. The results of this study 
revealed that the presence of HPV DNA was associated with patients' specific
characteristics and better overall survival exclusively in oropharyngeal sites.
To define the fraction of HNSCC preventable by HPV vaccination or amenable to
less aggressive treatment, however, tobacco exposure and HPV markers other than
DNA presence need to be taken into account.

Copyright Â© 2011 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.26500 
PMCID: PMC3319485
PMID: 22020866  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
