

482. Lin Chung Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2011 Mar;25(6):270-3.

[Latent membrane protein-1 of EB virus and the phenotype of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and cervical lymph node metastasis in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Yue L(1), Jiang Z, Wu W, Zhang Y, Yin P, Zhang Y, Sheng C, Wei G, Li X, Ling K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Jiaxing
College, Jiaxing, 314000, China. yuelihuazj@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the relation of EB virus latent membrane protein-1 (LMP-1)
and the phenotype of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and cervical lymph
node metastasis in nasopharyngeal carcinoma.
METHOD: Based on histopathology and MRI imaging, nasopharyngeal biopsy tissues
from 88 patients with nasopharyngeal carcinoma were divided into 3 groups:
pathologic metastasis (18), MRI metastasis(40) and without metastasis (30). The
expressions of LMP-1, STAT3, Twist, E-Cadherin and Vimentin were examined
immunohistochemically in biopsy tissues.
RESULT: LMP-1 expression was found in 35 of 88 biopsy tissues with a positive
rate of 38.7%. The positive rates of LMP-1 in groups of pathologic metastasis,
MRI metastasis and without metastasis were 38.9% (7/18), 47.5% (19/40) and 30.0% 
(9/30), respectively, and significant difference were not found among three
groups. The expression of LMP-1 was positively correlated to both expressions of 
Twist and Vimentin (r = 0.276 and 0.282, are P < 0.01), but not to both
expressions of STAT3 and E-Cadherin. The positive expressions or abnormal
expression of STAT3, Twist, Vimentin and E-Cadherin were found in 57 of 88
(64.8%), 48 of 88 (54.5%), 22 of 88 (20.0%)and 53 of 88 (60.2%), respectively.
Significant differences in the expression of STAT3, Twist, Vimentin and
E-Cadherin were all found among groups of pathologic metastasis, MRI metastasis
and without metastasis, respectively (are P < 0.05). The expression of STAT3 was 
positively correlated to both expressions of Twist and Vimentin (r = 0.712 and
0.316, P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: EMT plays important role in cervical lymph node metastasis in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma. LMP-1 may be only as one of upstream factors associated
with the EMT, but not the decisive factor for cervical lymph node metastasis.


PMID: 21650062  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
