

486. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 2012 Dec;34(6):545-9. doi:
10.3881/j.issn.1000-503X.2012.06.002.

[Detection of human papillomavirus in oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Huang H(1), Zhang B, Chen W, Zou SM, Zhang YX, Qiao YL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Cancer Hospital and Cancer Institute,
Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the infection rate and subtypes of human papilloma
virus(HPV) in patients with oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) and
analyze the clinicopathologic features of patients with or without HPV infection.
METHODS: A total of 66 biopsy or surgical specimens of OSCC archived in the
Pathology Department of Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences were analyzed by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and the generic amplification products were
detected by DNA enzyme immunoassay (DEIA) and typed by reverse hybridization line
probe assay.
RESULTS: HPV-DNA was detected in 11 (16.7%) of all specimens. Among them, 7 were 
infected with HPV-16,and the remaining 4 patients were infected with HPV-16/11,
HPV-35, HPV-58/52, and HPV-33/52/54, respectively. HPV-16 was detected in 72.7%
of all positive specimens. There were more females in HPV-positive group than
HPV-negative group (36.4% vs. 1.8%,P=0.002). Patients with HPV-positive tumors
were more likely to be non-smokers (36.4% vs. 0,p=0.001) and non-drinkers (45.5% 
vs. 1.8%,p=0.001) than those with HPV-negative tumors. The proportion of
moderately or poorly differentiated tumors was higher in HPV-positive patients
than HPV-negative patients (81.8% vs. 63.7%), although without statistical
significance (p=0.409). No difference was observed in T classification, N
classification, and overall tumor stage.
CONCLUSIONS: HPV infection rate was 16.7% in this cohort. HPV-positive OSCC has
its unique etiologic and clinicopathological characteristics.

DOI: 10.3881/j.issn.1000-503X.2012.06.002 
PMID: 23286396  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
