

487. Am J Surg Pathol. 2010 Nov;34(11):1678-85. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181f12c85.

Idiopathic cervical fibrosis--a new member of IgG4-related sclerosing diseases:
report of 4 cases, 1 complicated by composite lymphoma.

Cheuk W(1), Tam FK, Chan AN, Luk IS, Yuen AP, Chan WK, Hung TC, Chan JK.

Author information: 
(1)Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Hong Kong Sanatorium, Hong Kong.
cheuk_wah@hotmail.com

Idiopathic cervical fibrosis is a rare tumefactive inflammatory-sclerosing lesion
involving the soft tissues of the head and neck, and a proportion of patients
also have synchronous or metachronous inflammatory fibrosclerosing lesions in
other anatomic sites. The latter finding suggests that this entity may represent 
a member of IgG4-related sclerosing diseases. We report 4 cases to support this
postulation. The patients were male adults aged 42 to 89 years, who presented
with an infiltrative, firm cervical mass. Two patients also had IgG4-related
chronic sclerosing sialadenitis of submandibular gland and lymphadenopathy.
Histologically, the cervical soft tissue lesions had ill-defined borders,
consisting of coalescent nodular lymphoid aggregates accompanied by a sclerotic
stroma. Nerve infiltration, skeletal muscle invasion, and phlebitis were present.
There was a significant increase in IgG4 plasma cells (87 to 327 per high-power
field, with IgG4/IgG ratio of 63% to 98%). In the soft tissue lesion of 1
patient, there were expansile foci comprising dense sheets of plasma cells and
small lymphoid cells that exhibited Îº light chain restriction and clonal
immunoglobulin gene rearrangement, consistent with supervening extranodal
marginal zone lymphoma. The adjacent lymph node from the same patient showed
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-positive classical Hodgkin lymphoma with typical
morphology and immunophenotype (CD30, CD15, PAX5). Thus lymphoma can supervene in
the chronic inflammatory background similar to that recently documented for
IgG4-related sclerosing disease of the ocular adnexa.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181f12c85 
PMID: 20871392  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
