

488. Cancer Gene Ther. 2009 May;16(5):383-92. doi: 10.1038/cgt.2008.90. Epub 2008 Nov 
14.

Combination therapy with radiation or cisplatin enhances the potency of Ad5/35
chimeric oncolytic adenovirus in a preclinical model of head and neck cancer.

Ganesh S(1), Gonzalez-Edick M, Gibbons D, Ge Y, VanRoey M, Robinson M, Jooss K.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Genesys Inc, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA. ganeshshanti@yahoo.com

Ad5/35 chimeric oncolytic viruses (OVs) have earlier been shown to increase the
level of vector transduction, intratumoral virus spread and survival in a number 
of xenograft models when compared with Ad5-based viruses. Because radiation and
chemotherapy are the current standards of care for most cancer indications,
Ad5/35 OVs have been tested here in combination with either radiation or
chemotherapy in a head and neck cancer (HNC) xenograft model to determine whether
such combination therapies enhance the potency of the virus, thereby leading to a
greater therapeutic effect. In mice treated with either Ad5 OV (OV-5) or Ad5/35
chimeric OV (OV-5T35H), there was a delay in tumor progression compared with
animals treated with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) alone. When Ad5/35 chimeric 
OV and radiation were used in combination, there was a further delay in tumor
progression, which resulted in a significant increase in the mean survival time
of tumor-bearing mice compared with Ad5/35 or Ad5 OV monotherapy or to the
combination of Ad5 OV with radiation, which was significantly less potent
(P<0.0001) compared with the Ad5/35 OV plus radiation combination. Similarly, a
combination of Ad5/35 chimeric OV with cisplatin significantly delayed tumor
progression compared with Ad5/35 OV or Ad5 OV virus alone or with the combination
of Ad5 virus with cisplatin (P<0.01). In summary, the combination of the potent
Ad5/35 chimeric OV with either radiation or chemotherapy leads to significantly
increased survival of mice bearing highly aggressive tumors, and may therefore
offer an effective treatment strategy for patients with difficult to treat HNC.

DOI: 10.1038/cgt.2008.90 
PMID: 19011598  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
