

495. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2009 Aug;42(8):761-4. Epub 2009 Jul 3.

High HTLV-1 proviral load, a marker for HTLV-1 associated myelopathy/tropical
spastic paraparesis, is also detected in patients with infective dermatitis
associated with HTLV-1.

Primo J(1), Siqueira I, Nascimento MC, Oliveira MF, Farre L, Carvalho EM,
Bittencourt AL.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Medicina Interna, Complexo Hospitalar Universit√°rio Prof.
Edgard Santos, Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador, BA, Brasil.

Salvador (BA, Brazil) is an endemic area for human T-cell lymphotrophic virus
type 1 (HTLV-1). The overall prevalence of HTLV-1 infection in the general
population has been estimated to be 1.76%. HTLV-1 carriers may develop a variety 
of diseases such as adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma, HTLV-1-associated
myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP) and infective dermatitis
associated with HTLV-1 (IDH). IDH is a chronic and severe form of childhood
exudative and infective dermatitis involving mainly the scalp, neck and ears. It 
has recently been observed that 30% of patients with IDH develop juvenile
HAM/TSP. The replication of HTLV-1 has been reported to be greater in adult
HAM/TSP patients than in asymptomatic HTLV-1 carriers. In the current study, the 
proviral load of 28 children and adolescents with IDH not associated with HAM/TSP
was determined and the results were compared to those obtained in 28 HTLV-1 adult
carriers and 28 adult patients with HAM/TSP. The proviral load in IDH patients
was similar to that of patients with HAM/TSP and much higher than that found in
HTLV-1 carriers. The high levels of proviral load in IDH patients were not
associated with age, duration of illness, duration of breast-feeding, or activity
status of the skin disease. Since proviral load is associated with neurological
disability, these data support the view that IDH patients are at high risk of
developing HAM/TSP.


PMCID: PMC2963476
PMID: 19578703  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
