

497. Oral Oncol. 2011 Aug;47(8):698-701. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2011.04.022.

Squamous cell carcinoma of the oral cavity rarely harbours oncogenic human
papillomavirus.

Lopes V(1), Murray P, Williams H, Woodman C, Watkinson J, Robinson M.

Author information: 
(1)Head and Neck Directorate NHS Lothian and University of Edinburgh, UK.
vlopes@staffmail.ed.ac.uk

Although it is now well established that a significant proportion of
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) harbour oncogenic human
papillomavirus (HPV) sequences, the frequency with which these sequences are
detected in oral SCC (excluding oropharyngeal subsites) is highly variable. In an
attempt to establish the true prevalence of HPV-16 and HPV-18 subtypes in oral
SCC, we screened 142 consecutive cases from a UK cohort using both conventional
PCR with consensus primers and type-specific quantitative PCR (Q-PCR), while at
the same time employing a rigorous protocol to avoid sample contamination. Q-PCR 
revealed HPV sequences in five cases; two contained HPV-16 alone, two HPV-18
alone, and one sample carried both genotypes. However, only two of these cases
(both HPV-16-positive) had moderate viral loads (51 and 91 viral copies per 100
cells respectively) and were positive for HPV DNA by conventional PCR. Both cases
contained HPV DNA in tumour cells as shown by Q-PCR analysis of micro-dissected
tissue and by in situ hybridisation. The remaining three cases had only very low 
viral loads (between 3 and 7 viral copies per 100 cells), were negative by
conventional PCR and lacked HPV DNA in tumour cells. Our data provide strong
evidence that oncogenic HPV is uncommon in oral SCC and that routine HPV testing 
of these tumours cannot be advocated.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2011.04.022 
PMID: 21689967  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
