

499. J Cutan Med Surg. 2009 Jul-Aug;13(4):215-20.

Spiradenocarcinoma arising from a spiradenocylindroma: unusual case with
lymphoepithelioma-like areas.

Chetty R(1), Perez-Ordonez B, Gilbert R, Pagedar NA, Waldron J, Ghazarian D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Health Network/University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Hybrid skin adnexal tumors are common, and spiradenocylindroma is
well described.
OBJECTIVE: However, malignant transformation in this setting is infrequent,
especially resemblance to lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma of skin, which is not 
associated with Epstein-Barr virus.
METHODS: A 65-year-old female presented with ataxia and a skin nodule composed of
a hybrid adnexal tumor (spiradenoma and cylindroma) that transitioned into an
undifferentiated carcinoma with attendant lymphocytes and plasma cells. There was
widespread dissemination of the undifferentiated component to regional neck lymph
nodes.
RESULTS: The undifferentiated component resembled a lymphoepithelioma-like
carcinoma and showed focal evidence of tubular and squamous differentiation. The 
tumor was Epstein-Barr encoded RNAs (EBER) negative by in situ hybridization. No 
evidence of neuroendocrine differentiation was seen in the tumor, despite the
patient having symptoms of paraneoplastic ataxia that improved after surgery.
CONCLUSION: This case highlights the transition of a benign hybrid tumor
(spiradenocylindroma) into a spiradenocarcinoma that resembled
lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma of skin. It also highlights two unusual
features: widespread lymph node dissemination and presentation with
paraneoplastic syndrome-associated ataxia.

DOI: 10.2310/7750.2008.08059 
PMID: 19706230  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
