

5. Bull Soc Pathol Exot. 2016 Aug;109(3):160-4. doi: 10.1007/s13149-016-0500-7. Epub
2016 Jun 20.

[Human papilloma viruses: other risk factor of head and neck carcinoma].

[Article in French]

Woto-Gaye G(1), M'Farrej MK(1), Doh K(2), Thiam I(1), Touré S(3), Diop R(3), Dial
C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Hôpital Aristide-Le-Dantec, pavillon Bichat, avenue Pasteur, BP 3001, Dakar,
Sénégal.
(2)Hôpital Aristide-Le-Dantec, pavillon Bichat, avenue Pasteur, BP 3001, Dakar,
Sénégal. kwame.doh@ucad.edu.sn.
(3)Service de stomatologie, d'odontologie et de chirurgie maxillofaciale, Dakar, 
Sénégal.
(4)Hôpital Général de Grand Yoff, BP 3270, Grand Yoff, Dakar, Sénégal.

Head and neck carcinoma (HNC) occupy the sixth place as the most frequent type of
cancer worldwide. Next to alcohol and tobacco intoxication, other risk factors
(RF) are suspected, including the human papilloma viruses (HPVs). The aim of this
study was to highlight the prevalence of HPVs and histo-epidemiological
characteristics of HNC HPV+ in Senegal. This is a prospective, multicenter
preliminary study of 18 months (January 1, 2012-June 30, 2014). The cases of HNC 
histologically confirmed in Senegal were then sent to the bio-pathology
department of the Curie Institute in Paris to search HPVs. In the 90 included
cases, the PCR technique was successful in 54 cases (60%). HPVs were found in
seven cases, that is, a prevalence of 13%. HPVs were associated with 5 cases of
hypopharyngeal carcinoma and 2 cases of carcinoma of the oral cavity. Patients
with HNC HPV+ had a median age of 42 years against 49 years for HPV-patients.
Three patients (42.8%) with HPV+ carcinomas were smokers. Of the 47 HPV-patients,
40 patients (87.1%) had alcohol intoxication and/or smoking. The concept of oral 
sex was refuted by all our patients. Squamous cell carcinoma was the only
histological type found. HPV+ cell carcinoma showed no specific histological
appearance. HPVs are another certain RF of HNC in Senegal. The major therapeutic 
and prognostic impact of HPVinduced cancers requires the systematic search of the
viruses by the PCR technique.

DOI: 10.1007/s13149-016-0500-7 
PMID: 27325173  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
