

506. Clin Cancer Res. 2016 Mar 1;22(5):1048-54. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-15-2667.
Epub 2015 Dec 30.

Molecular Pathways: Mechanism of Action for Talimogene Laherparepvec, a New
Oncolytic Virus Immunotherapy.

Kohlhapp FJ(1), Kaufman HL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Surgical Oncology, Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey, New
Brunswick, New Jersey.
(2)Division of Surgical Oncology, Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey, New
Brunswick, New Jersey. hk553@cinj.rutgers.edu.

Oncolytic viruses are native or engineered viruses that preferentially replicate 
in and lyse cancer cells. Selective tumor cell replication is thought to depend
on infection of neoplastic cells, which harbor low levels of protein kinase R
(PKR) and dysfunctional type I IFN signaling elements. These changes allow more
efficient viral replication, and with selected deletion of specific viral genes, 
replication in normal cells with activated PKR may not be possible. Direct tumor 
cell lysis, release of soluble tumor antigens, and danger-associated molecular
factors are all thought to help prime and promote tumor-specific immunity.
Talimogene laherparepvec (T-VEC) is a genetically modified herpes simplex virus, 
type I and is the first oncolytic virus to demonstrate a clinical benefit in
patients with melanoma. T-VEC has also been evaluated for the treatment of head
and neck cancer, pancreatic cancer, and likely other types of cancer will be
targeted in the near future. T-VEC has been modified for improved safety,
tumor-selective replication, and induction of host immunity by deletion of
several viral genes and expression of human granulocyte-macrophage colony
stimulating factor. Although the mechanism of action for T-VEC is incompletely
understood, the safety profile of T-VEC and ability to promote immune responses
suggest future combination studies with other immunotherapy approaches including 
checkpoint blockade through PD-1, PD-L1, and CTLA-4 to be a high priority for
clinical development. Oncolytic viruses also represent unique regulatory and
biosafety challenges but offer a potential new class of agents for the treatment 
of cancer.

Â©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-15-2667 
PMID: 26719429  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
