

511. Adv Otorhinolaryngol. 2011;72:157-9. doi: 10.1159/000324780. Epub 2011 Aug 18.

A novel immune evasion mechanism of LMP-1, an EBV-primary oncogene, in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Yoshizaki T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Graduate School of Medical 
Science, Kanazawa University, Takaramachi, Kanazawa, Japan.
tomoy@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma is an Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated tumor. Viruses
that are associated with malignant transformation have evolved unique mechanisms 
to interfere with this interaction to evade antiviral T cell responses. EBV
exploits many immune evasive strategies to successfully establish a latent
infection in B cells. CD8+ T cell responses to LMP-1 are generally very low and
rarely detected in healthy virus carriers. Activation of the NF-kB pathway by
EBV-LMP-1 leads to an upregulation of the MHC class I antigen-processing pathway.
Paradoxically, LMP-1itself induces a subdominant CD8+ T cell response and appears
to have evolved to avoid immune recognition. An expression of LMP-1 in human
cells enhanced the trans-presentation of CD8+ T cell epitopes; however,
cis-presentation of LMP-1-derived epitopes was severely impaired. Deletion of the
first transmembrane domain of LMP-1, which prevented self-aggregation,
significantly enhanced the cis-presentation of T cell epitopes from this protein,
whereas it lost its ability to upregulate trans-presentation. These results
delineate a novel mechanism of immune evasion, which renders a virally encoded
oncogene inaccessible to the conventional MHC class I pathway limiting its
cis-presentation.

Copyright Â© 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000324780 
PMID: 21865718  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
