

518. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Jan 8;44(1):256-66. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv1307. Epub 2015
Nov 26.

A general strategy to inhibiting viral -1 frameshifting based on upstream
attenuation duplex formation.

Hu HT(1), Cho CP(1), Lin YH(1), Chang KY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, National Chung-Hsing University, 250 Kuo-Kung Road,
Taichung, 402 Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Biochemistry, National Chung-Hsing University, 250 Kuo-Kung Road,
Taichung, 402 Taiwan kychang@dragon.nchu.edu.tw.

Viral -1 programmed ribosomal frameshifting (PRF) as a potential antiviral target
has attracted interest because many human viral pathogens, including human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and coronaviruses, rely on -1 PRF for optimal
propagation. Efficient eukaryotic -1 PRF requires an optimally placed stimulator 
structure downstream of the frameshifting site and different strategies targeting
viral -1 PRF stimulators have been developed. However, accessing particular -1
PRF stimulator information represents a bottle-neck in combating the emerging
epidemic viral pathogens such as Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus
(MERS-CoV). Recently, an RNA hairpin upstream of frameshifting site was shown to 
act as a cis-element to attenuate -1 PRF with mechanism unknown. Here, we show
that an upstream duplex formed in-trans, by annealing an antisense to its
complementary mRNA sequence upstream of frameshifting site, can replace an
upstream hairpin to attenuate -1 PRF efficiently. This finding indicates that the
formation of a proximal upstream duplex is the main determining factor
responsible for -1 PRF attenuation and provides mechanistic insight.
Additionally, the antisense-mediated upstream duplex approach downregulates -1
PRF stimulated by distinct -1 PRF stimulators, including those of MERS-CoV,
suggesting its general application potential as a robust means to evaluating
viral -1 PRF inhibition as soon as the sequence information of an emerging human 
coronavirus is available.

Â© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkv1307 
PMCID: PMC4705660
PMID: 26612863  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
