

519. Lin Chung Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2015 Sep;29(17):1549-52.

[Subtype analysis and clinical significance of HPV infection in laryngeal
squamous cell carcinoma and precancerous lesions].

[Article in Chinese]

Guan L, Sun N, Sun G, Fang Q, Meng Y, Zhao X, Meng L.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the correlation of laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma
(LSCC) and precancerous lesion with HPV infection subtypes and possible clinical 
relationship.
METHOD: Eighty-three cases in paraffin embedded tissues were detected with thirty
seven HPV subtypes by flow-through hybridization and gene chip (HybriMax),
including 31 cases of laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma, 52 cases of precancerous
lesions (29 cases of vocal cord leukoplakia and 23 cases of laryngeal papilloma),
and 36 cases of vocal cord polyp as normal vocal mucosa were used as control.
RESULT: The total positive rate of HPV was 19.4% in the group of laryngeal
squamous cell carcinoma (6/31), 0 in vocal cord leukoplakia, 65.2% in laryngeal
papilloma (15/23), and the control group were all negative, HPV virus subtype of 
HPV-positive laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma were all high-risk HPV16; and
there were 6 HPV virus subtypes in laryngeal papilloma (8: HPV6,4: HPV52, 1:
HPV11, 1: HPV18, 2: HPV45, 3: HPV16), individual mixing two or more subtypes
infection. HPV infection of laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma and precancerous
lesions has no statistically significant difference according to gender, high
low-risk subtypes.
CONCLUSION: HPV infection related to laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma and
precancerous lesions, but no significant correlation with the subtype
distribution of high and low risk; HPV detection is making positive sense to
clinical diagnosis of laryngeal carcinoma and precancerous lesions as well as the
development of specific HPV subtype vaccine.


PMID: 26647542  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
