

522. PLoS One. 2017 May 25;12(5):e0177275. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0177275.
eCollection 2017.

Expression profile of Epstein-Barr virus and human adenovirus small RNAs in
tonsillar B and T lymphocytes.

Assadian F(1), Kamel W(1), Laurell G(2), Svensson C(1), Punga T(1), Akusjärvi
G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala Biomedical
Center, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Department of Surgical Sciences, Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck
Surgery, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

We have used high-throughput small RNA sequencing to characterize viral small RNA
expression in purified tonsillar B and T lymphocytes isolated from patients
tested positive for Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) or human adenovirus (HAdV)
infections, respectively. In the small set of patients analyzed, the expression
profile of EBV and HAdV miRNAs could not distinguish between patients diagnosed
with tonsillar hypertrophy or chronic/recurrent tonsillitis. The EBV miR-BART
expression profile among the patients diagnosed with tonsillar diseases resembles
most closely the pattern seen in EBV+ tumors (Latency II/I). The miR-BARTs that
appear to be absent in normal EBV infected cells are essentially all detectable
in the diseased tonsillar B lymphocytes. In the EBV+ B cells we detected 44 EBV
miR-BARTs derived from the proposed BART precursor hairpins whereof five are not 
annotated in miRBase v21. One previously undetected miRNA, BART16b-5p, originates
from the miR-BART16 precursor hairpin as an alternative 5´ miR-BART16 located
precisely upstream of the annotated miR-BART16-5p. Further, our analysis revealed
an extensive sequence variation among the EBV miRNAs with isomiRs having a
constant 5´ end but alternative 3´ ends. A range of small RNAs was also detected 
from the terminal stem of the EBER RNAs and the 3´ part of v-snoRNA1. During a
lytic HAdV infection in established cell lines the terminal stem of the viral
non-coding VA RNAs are processed to highly abundant viral miRNAs (mivaRNAs). In
contrast, mivaRNA expression in HAdV positive tonsillar T lymphocytes was very
low. The small RNA profile further showed that the 5´ mivaRNA from VA RNAI and
the 3´ mivaRNA from VA RNAII were as predicted, whereas the 3´ mivaRNA from VA
RNAI showed an aberrant processing upstream of the expected Dicer cleavage site.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0177275 
PMCID: PMC5444648
PMID: 28542273  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
