

526. Int J Cancer. 2010 Jul 1;127(1):111-7. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25015.

Risk factors and survival by HPV-16 E6 and E7 antibody status in human
papillomavirus positive head and neck cancer.

Smith EM(1), Pawlita M, Rubenstein LM, Haugen TH, Hamsikova E, Turek LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, College of Public Health, University of Iowa, Iowa
City, IA 52242, USA. elaine-smith@uiowa.edu

High-risk human papillomavirus types (HPV-HR) are associated with head and neck
cancer (HNC) risk and better survival. Most patients with HPV-HR DNA-positive
tumors develop anti-HPV E6/E7 antibodies; however, it is unclear whether those
who mount an immune response have similar risk factors or clinical outcomes as
those who do not. HPV-16 DNA tumor-positive HNC cases were evaluated for HPV-16
E6 and E7 antibodies using a GST capture ELISA system. Among 57 HPV-16 DNA
tumor-positive HNC cases, 67% were detected with HPV-16 E6 and/or E7 antibodies. 
Male gender (76% vs. 42%, p = 0.02), younger age (63% vs. 16%, p = 0.001) but not
tobacco or alcohol were associated with E6 and/or E7 seropositivity.
Seropositivity was associated more often with late stage (76%), poor grade (65%),
positive nodes (82%). and in the oropharynx (82%), Median disease-specific and
recurrence-free survival were longer in E6 and/or E7 seropositive compared to
E6/E7-negative cases (2.2 years vs. 1.4 years, both outcomes), although results
were not statistically significant. When examined jointly with p16 expression, E6
and/or E7-positive/p16-positive cases had better disease-specific (2.1 years vs. 
1.1 years, p = 0.06) and recurrence-free (2.3 years vs. 1.1 years, p = 0.03)
survival compared to E6-/E7-/p16- cases. These findings suggest there are 2
distinct HNC patient groups with HPV DNA-positive tumors, distinguishable by E6
and/or E7 antibody status. Differences in antibody status are associated with
distinct risk factors and clinical outcomes. This information can be available as
a simple blood test at initial presentation, before the removal of tissue through
biopsy or surgery.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.25015 
PMID: 19876924  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
