

537. Virology. 2013 Oct;445(1-2):205-12. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2013.07.016. Epub 2013
Aug 13.

Epigenetics of human papillomaviruses.

Johannsen E(1), Lambert PF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA; Department of Medicine, School of Medicine and
Public Health, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA; McArdle
Laboratory for Cancer Research, School of Medicine and Public Health, University 
of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Human papilllomaviruses (HPVs) are common human pathogens that infect cutaneous
or mucosal epithelia in which they cause warts, self-contained benign lesions
that commonly regress. The HPV life cycle is intricately tied to the
differentiation of the host epithelium it infects. Mucosotropic HPVs are the most
common sexually transmitted pathogen known to mankind. A subset of the
mucosotropic HPVs, so-called high risk HPVs, is etiologically associated with
numerous cancers of the anogenital tract, most notably the cervix, as well as a
growing fraction of head and neck cancers. In these cancers, the HPV genome,
which normally exists an a double stranded, circular, nuclear plasmid, is
commonly found integrated into the host genome and expresses two viral oncogenes,
E6 and E7, that are implicated in the development and maintainance of the cancers
caused by these high risk HPVs. Numerous studies, primarily on the high risk
HPV16, have documented that the methylation status of the viral genome changes
not only in the context of the viral life cycle but also in the context of the
progressive neoplastic disease that culminates in cancer. In this article, we
summarize the knowledge gained from those studies. We also provide the first
analysis of available ChIP-seq data on the occupancy of both epigentically
modified histones as well as transcription factors on the high risk HPV18 genome 
in the context of HeLa cells, a cervical cancer-derived cell line that has been
the subject of extensive analyses using this technique.

Â© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2013.07.016 
PMCID: PMC3822409
PMID: 23953230  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
