

538. Oncol Rep. 2012 Nov;28(5):1750-6. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.1990. Epub 2012 Aug 24.

The distribution of human papillomavirus in tissues from patients with head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Wei W(1), Shi Q, Guo F, Zhang BY, Chen C, Zhang NS, Dong XP.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research, Ministry of
Education, Head and Neck Surgery Department Peking University Cancer Hospital and
Institute, Beijing 100142, PR China.

Several types of HPVs have been shown to be associated with the development of
malignant cancers in various head and neck tumors. More information on the HPV
prevalence in patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs) need to
be obtained. In this study, formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissues of 93
pathologically diagnosed head and neck SCC patients were collected from Peking
University Cancer Hospital. HPV DNA sequences in tumor tissues were screened by a
commercial Luminex technique for HPVs and HPV-specific PCR assays. Presence of
HPV16/18 oncoprotein in tumor tissues was assessed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) 
with HPV16/18 E6-specific antibodies. Of the 93 patients, 16 (17.2%) cases were
found to be HPV DNA-positive, including 7 HPV18-positive, 8 HPV16-positive and 1 
HPV52-positive. IHC assays demonstrated that 31.2% (29/93) tested sections showed
positive signals in the tumor cells. The total positive rate of HPV genome and
its encoding products in the tested samples was 44.1% (41/93). Further analyses
revealed that HPV infections in head and neck SCCs were significantly related
with the tumor anatomic sites, showing decreasing tendency from outside (lip
cancer) to inside (laryngeal cancer), but had no correlation with pathological,
clinical grades and age of the patients. In all, HPV infections are commonly
identified in the tumor tissues of patients with head and neck SCCs, in which
HPV16 and 18 are the most prevalent HPV genotypes. Direct detection of high-risk 
HPV oncoprotein by IHC may be a good tool for classifying a tumor as truly
HPV-associated.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2012.1990 
PMID: 22923266  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
