

539. J Med Virol. 2016 Apr;88(4):695-702. doi: 10.1002/jmv.24385. Epub 2015 Nov 9.

Detection of human polyomaviruses MCPyV, HPyV6, and HPyV7 in malignant and
non-malignant tonsillar tissues.

Saláková M(1), Košlabová E(2), Vojtěchová Z(1), Tachezy R(1), Šroller V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute of Hematology and Blood Transfusion,
Prague, U Nemocnice 1, Czech Republic.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, 1st Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Motol University Hospital, Prague, Czech 
Republic.

Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCPyV) is associated with Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC), 
a rare skin malignancy. Human polyomavirus six and seven (HPyV6 and HPyV7) were
identified on a skin but have not been associated with any pathology. The
serology data suggest that infection with polyomaviruses occurs in childhood and 
they are widespread in population. However, the site of persistent infection has 
not been identified. Altogether, 103 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
specimens and five fresh frozen tissues (FF) of non-malignant tonsils and 97 FFPE
and 15 FF samples of tonsillar carcinomas were analyzed by qPCR for the presence 
of MCPyV, HPyV6, and HPyV7 DNA. All MCPyV DNA positive FF tissues were screened
for the expression of early viral transcripts. Overall prevalence of MCPyV,
HPyV6, and HPyV7 in non-malignant tonsillar tissues was 10.2%, 4.6%, and, 0.9%,
respectively. The prevalence of MCPyV DNA in non-malignant tonsils increased with
age (P < 0.05). While the prevalence of MCPyV DNA was significantly higher in the
tumors than non-malignant tissues (35.7% vs. 10.2%) (P < 0.001), the prevalence
of HPyV6 DNA (5.4% vs. 4.6%) and HPyV7 DNA (1.8% vs. 0.9%) were comparable. In
all MCPyV DNA positive FF tissues early transcripts were detected. MCPyV, HPyV6, 
and HPyV7 DNAs were found in tonsils, suggesting that the tonsils may be a site
of viral latency. The viral load was low indicating that only a fraction of cells
are infected. The higher prevalence of MCPyV DNA was detected in tonsillar tumors
but there was no difference in the viral load between tumor and healthy tissues.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.24385 
PMID: 26381295  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
