

544. J Ultrasound Med. 2013 May;32(5):763-8. doi: 10.7863/ultra.32.5.763.

Inflammation markers correlate with common carotid intima-media thickness in
patients perinatally infected with human immunodeficiency virus 1.

Di Biagio A(1), Rosso R, Maggi P, Mazzei D, Bernardini C, Nulvesu L, Parisini A, 
Nicco E, De Carli F, Rodriguez G, Viscoli C.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease Clinic, University of Genoa, San Martino Hospital, Genoa,
Italy. antonio.dibiagio@hsanmartino.it

OBJECTIVES: To investigate common carotid intima-media thickness in a cohort of
patients who were vertically infected with human immunodeficiency virus 1
(HIV-1).
METHODS: We conducted a cross-sectional observational study. Human
immunodeficiency virus 1-infected patients were compared with age-, sex-, and
body mass index-matched healthy participants. Common carotid intima-media
thickness was measured in all participants on both sides of the neck, and the
mean intima-media thickness was calculated. Metabolic parameters and markers of
inflammation were measured only in HIV-1-infected patients. Statistical analysis 
was performed by multiple regression and by a matrix of Pearson correlation
coefficients. The Student t test was used to compare mean common carotid
intima-media thickness values between groups.
RESULTS: Forty patients (21 female) with HIV-1 infection acquired from birth with
a mean age ± SD of 16.3 ± 4.7 years and 27 healthy participants (11 female) with 
a mean age of 17.7 ± 4.6 years were included in the study. Mean common carotid
intima-media thickness in the HIV-1-infected group (0.450 ± 0.088 mm) was
significantly higher (P < .05) than in the control group (0.407 ± 0.079 mm). No
significant association was found between intima-media thickness and a specific
antiretroviral regimen, exposure to combined antiretroviral agents, and HIV
status. In multiple regression analyses, higher levels of insulin (P= .007) and
elevated levels of glycated hemoglobin (P= .01) were associated with intima-media
thickness changes.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients perinatally infected with HIV have increased common carotid
intima-media thickness compared with healthy individuals. These changes were more
pronounced with increasing age and inflammation markers. Interventions that
improve cardiovascular risk profiles should be considered in HIV-infected young
adults.

DOI: 10.7863/ultra.32.5.763 
PMID: 23620317  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
