

546. PLoS One. 2017 Jan 19;12(1):e0170091. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0170091.
eCollection 2017.

Prevalence and Determinants of Oral Human Papillomavirus Infection in 500 Young
Adults from Italy.

Lupato V(1)(2), Holzinger D(3), HÃ¶fler D(3), Menegaldo A(1), Giorgi Rossi
P(4)(5), Del Mistro A(6), Da Mosto MC(1), Pawlita M(3), Boscolo-Rizzo P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Regional Center for Head and Neck Cancer,
University of Padua, Treviso, Italy.
(2)Unit of Otolaryngology, Azienda Ospedaliera "S. Maria degli Angeli",
Pordenone, Italy.
(3)Division of Molecular Diagnostics of Oncogenic Infections, Infection,
Inflammation and Cancer Program, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Interinstitutional Epidemiology Unit, Local Health Authority, Reggio Emilia,
Italy.
(5)Arcispedale S. Maria Nuova, IRCCS, Reggio Emilia, Italy.
(6)Immunology and Molecular Oncology Unit, Istituto Oncologico Veneto-IRCCS,
Padova, Italy.

Although the prevalence of human papillomavirus (HPV)-related oropharyngeal
squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) is increasing in developed countries and becoming
a relevant health issue, the natural history of oral HPV infection is still
unclear. Estimating the infection's prevalence in specific populations and
identifying risk factors can widen our understanding of its natural history and
help to delineate appropriate prevention strategies. This study sought to (i)
determine oral HPV prevalence and genotype distribution in a large series of
young Italian adults, (ii) validate an oral rinse sampling/storage protocol, and 
(iii) pinpoint factors associated with oral HPV infection. Five hundred students,
nurses, and technicians (19-35 years-old) studying and working at/for the
University of Padua were recruited. Each participant was provided with an oral
rinse sampling kit and instructions for use. They were also asked to complete an 
anonymous questionnaire concerning their demographic characteristics and
behaviors. The questionnaires and oral rinse containers were labeled with the
same identification code number. The oral rinse samples were tested using a
bead-based multiplex BSGP5+/6+-MPG genotyping assay which amplifies the L1 region
of 51 mucosal HPV types. The prevalence of oral HPV infection was 4.0% (95%
confidence interval (CI), 2.5%-6.1%); those of 14 high-risk HPV types and of
HPV-type 16 (HPV16) infection were 2.2% (95% CI, 1.1%-3.9%) and 1.6% (95% CI,
0.6%-3.1%), respectively. HPV16 was the most frequent genotype (40.0% of oral HPV
infections). No association was found between oral infection and the co-variables
studied (gender, tobacco, alcohol and illegal drug use, number of sex and oral
sex partners, HPV vaccination status, history of HPV and sexually transmitted
infections, abnormal pap smears, recurrent tonsillitis and tonsillectomy). The
oral rinse sampling protocol outlined here proved to be simple, efficient and
well tolerated, and the prevalence rate can be considered reliable and thus
useful to guide future research. Determinants of oral HPV infection are still
unclear and further studies are certainly warranted.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0170091 
PMCID: PMC5245874
PMID: 28103272  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
