

55. PLoS One. 2017 Sep 28;12(9):e0185624. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0185624.
eCollection 2017.

Characterization of immortalized human brown and white pre-adipocyte cell models 
from a single donor.

Markussen LK(1), Isidor MS(1), Breining P(2)(3), Andersen ES(1), Rasmussen NE(1),
Petersen LI(1), Pedersen SB(2)(3), Richelsen B(2)(3), Hansen JB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Internal Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital,
Aarhus, Denmark.

Brown adipose tissue with its constituent brown adipocytes is a promising
therapeutic target in metabolic disorders due to its ability to dissipate energy 
and improve systemic insulin sensitivity and glucose homeostasis. The molecular
control of brown adipocyte differentiation and function has been extensively
studied in mice, but relatively little is known about such regulatory mechanisms 
in humans, which in part is due to lack of human brown adipose tissue derived
cell models. Here, we used retrovirus-mediated overexpression to stably integrate
human telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) into stromal-vascular cell
fractions from deep and superficial human neck adipose tissue biopsies from the
same donor. The brown and white pre-adipocyte cell models (TERT-hBA and TERT-hWA,
respectively) displayed a stable proliferation rate and differentiation until at 
least passage 20. Mature TERT-hBA adipocytes expressed higher levels of
thermogenic marker genes and displayed a higher maximal respiratory capacity than
mature TERT-hWA adipocytes. TERT-hBA adipocytes were UCP1-positive and responded 
to Î²-adrenergic stimulation by activating the PKA-MKK3/6-p38 MAPK signaling
module and increasing thermogenic gene expression and oxygen consumption. Mature 
TERT-hWA adipocytes underwent efficient rosiglitazone-induced 'browning', as
demonstrated by strongly increased expression of UCP1 and other brown
adipocyte-enriched genes. In summary, the TERT-hBA and TERT-hWA cell models
represent useful tools to obtain a better understanding of the molecular control 
of human brown and white adipocyte differentiation and function as well as of
browning of human white adipocytes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0185624 
PMCID: PMC5619805
PMID: 28957413  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
