

564. Mol Cancer Res. 2012 Dec;10(12):1514-25. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-12-0157. Epub
2012 Oct 4.

Reovirus: a targeted therapeutic--progress and potential.

Maitra R(1), Ghalib MH, Goel S.

Author information: 
(1)Montefiore Medical Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY
10461, USA. sgoel@montefiore.org

Medical therapy of patients with malignancy requires a paradigm shift through
development of new drugs with a good safety record and novel mechanisms of
activity. While there is no dearth of such molecules, one particular agent,
"reovirus" is promising by its ability to target cancer cells with aberrant
signaling pathways. This double-stranded RNA virus has been therapeutically
formulated and has rapidly progressed from preclinical validation of anticancer
activity to a phase III registration study in platinum refractory metastatic
squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. During this process, reovirus has
shown safety both as a single agent when administered intratumorally and
intravenously, as well as in combination therapy, with multiple chemotherapeutics
such as gemcitabine, carboplatin/paclitaxel, and docetaxel; and similarly with
radiation. The scientific rationale for its development as an anticancer agent
stems from the fact that it preferentially replicates in and induces lyses of
cells with an activated Kras pathway. As documented in many previous studies, the
initial observation of greater tropism in Kras-compromised situation might
certainly not be the sole and possibly not even the predominant reason for
enhanced virulence. All the same, scientists have emphasized on Kras
optimistically due to its high prevalence in various types of cancers. Incidence 
of Kras mutation has been found to be highest in pancreatic cancer (85%-90%)
followed by colorectal (35-45%) and lung (25-30%). Reovirus, in fact has the
potential not only as a therapy but also as a tool to unravel the aberrant
cellular pathway leading to carcinogenicity.

DOI: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-12-0157 
PMCID: PMC3849112
PMID: 23038811  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
