

57. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2014 Feb;22(1):47-51. doi:
10.1097/MOO.0000000000000017.

Does human papilloma virus play a role in sinonasal inverted papilloma?

Govindaraj S(1), Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Icahn School of Medicine
at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Inverted papillomas are a benign sinonasal tumor with a
propensity for recurrence and malignant transformation. Although many
investigations have been made into the nature of this disease, its etiology and
causes for malignant transformation have yet to be fully elucidated. It is the
authors' objective to present a review on management of the disease and evaluate 
the present relationship between human papilloma virus (HPV) and inverted
papilloma.
RECENT FINDINGS: A causal relationship between HPV and the pathogenesis and
progression of inverted papilloma has been posited since the 1980s. Although
widely varied HPV detection rates have been reported, recent studies have noted a
substantial increase in both recurrence and malignant transformation in
HPV-infected inverted papillomas. However, exact cellular mechanisms by which
infection leads to subsequent recurrence and development of carcinoma have yet to
be elucidated.
SUMMARY: Evidence exists suggesting that HPV infection plays a role in the
progression of inverted papilloma and confers an increased risk for recurrence
and malignant transformation. PCR is the preferred detection method, and fresh or
frozen specimens are the ideal source of tissue for evaluation. Although multiple
studies have detected an association between HPV and inverted papilloma (both
recurrent and malignant transformation), further studies are necessary to
elucidate the underlying molecular pathways before an association can be changed 
to causation.

DOI: 10.1097/MOO.0000000000000017 
PMID: 24322658  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
