

575. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Feb 15;19(4):855-64. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-2746.
Epub 2012 Dec 18.

Development and characterization of HPV-positive and HPV-negative head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma tumorgrafts.

Kimple RJ(1), Harari PM, Torres AD, Yang RZ, Soriano BJ, Yu M, Armstrong EA,
Blitzer GC, Smith MA, Lorenz LD, Lee D, Yang DT, McCulloch TM, Hartig GK, Lambert
PF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Oncology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53705, USA.
rkimple@humonc.wisc.edu

PURPOSE: To develop a clinically relevant model system to study head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), we have established and characterized a
direct-from-patient tumorgraft model of human papillomavirus (HPV)-positive and
HPV-negative cancers.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Patients with newly diagnosed or recurrent HNSCC were
consented for donation of tumor specimens. Surgically obtained tissue was
implanted subcutaneously into immunodeficient mice. During subsequent passages,
both formalin-fixed/paraffin-embedded as well as flash-frozen tissues were
harvested. Tumors were analyzed for a variety of relevant tumor markers. Tumor
growth rates and response to radiation, cisplatin, or cetuximab were assessed and
early passage cell strains were developed for rapid testing of drug sensitivity.
RESULTS: Tumorgrafts have been established in 22 of 26 patients to date.
Significant diversity in tumorgraft tumor differentiation was observed with good 
agreement in degree of differentiation between patient tumor and tumorgraft
(Kappa 0.72). Six tumorgrafts were HPV-positive on the basis of p16 staining. A
strong inverse correlation between tumorgraft p16 and p53 or Rb was identified
(Spearman correlations P = 0.085 and P = 0.002, respectively). Significant growth
inhibition of representative tumorgrafts was shown with cisplatin, cetuximab, or 
radiation treatment delivered over a two-week period. Early passage cell strains 
showed high consistency in response to cancer therapy between tumorgraft and cell
strain.
CONCLUSIONS: We have established a robust human tumorgraft model system for
investigating HPV-positive and HPV-negative HNSCC. These tumorgrafts show strong 
correlation with the original tumor specimens and provide a powerful resource for
investigating mechanisms of therapeutic response as well as preclinical testing.

Â©2012 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-2746 
PMCID: PMC3581858
PMID: 23251001  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
