

578. J Virol. 2018 Aug 29;92(18). pii: e00663-18. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00663-18. Print
2018 Sep 15.

Epstein-Barr Virus Nuclear Antigen 3C Facilitates Cell Proliferation by
Regulating Cyclin D2.

Pei Y(1)(2), Singh RK(1)(2), Shukla SK(1)(2), Lang F(1)(2), Zhang S(1)(2),
Robertson ES(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Perelman School of
Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Tumor Virology Program, Abramson Cancer Center,
Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Perelman School of
Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
erle@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.

Cell cycle regulation is one of the hallmarks of virus-mediated oncogenesis.
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-induced lymphomas express a repertoire of essential
viral latent proteins that regulate expression of cell cycle-related proteins to 
dysregulate this process, thereby facilitating the proliferation of infected
cells. We now demonstrate that the essential EBV latent protein 3C (EBNA3C)
stabilizes cyclin D2 to regulate cell cycle progression. More specifically,
EBNA3C directly binds to cyclin D2 and they colocalize together in nuclear
compartments. We show that EBNA3C regulates the promoter of cyclin D2 through
cooperation with master transcription factor Bcl6 and enhances its stability by
inhibiting its ubiquitin-dependent degradation. EBNA3C also promoted cell
proliferation in the presence of cyclin D2, suggesting that cyclin D2 contributes
to EBNA3C-mediated cell cycle progression. These results provide new clues as to 
the role of this essential viral latent protein and its ability to regulate
expression of cellular factors, which drives the oncogenic process.IMPORTANCE
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is the first identified human tumor virus and is
associated with a range of human cancers. During EBV-induced lymphomas, the
essential viral latent proteins modify the expression of cell cycle-related
proteins to disturb the cell cycle process, thereby facilitating the
proliferative process. The essential EBV nuclear antigen 3C (EBNA3C) plays an
important role in EBV-mediated B-cell transformation. Here we show that EBNA3C
stabilizes cyclin D2 to regulate cell cycle progression. More specifically,
EBNA3C directly binds to cyclin D2, and they colocalize together in nuclear
compartments. EBNA3C enhances cyclin D2 stability by inhibiting its
ubiquitin-dependent degradation and significantly promotes cell proliferation in 
the presence of cyclin D2. Our results provide novel insights into the function
of EBNA3C on cell progression by regulating the cyclin D2 protein and raise the
possibility of the development of new anticancer therapies against EBV-associated
cancers.

Copyright Â© 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00663-18 
PMCID: PMC6146702 [Available on 2019-02-28]
PMID: 29997218  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
