

58. Recent Results Cancer Res. 2017;206:57-72.

HPV Integration in Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinomas: Cause and Consequence.

Speel EJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unit Molecular Oncopathology & Diagnostics, Department of Pathology,
GROW-School for Oncology and Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical
Center, P.O. Box 5800, 6202 AZ, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
ernstjan.speel@mumc.nl.

Human papillomaviruses (HPVs) are a necessary cause of anogenital squamous cell
carcinomas (SCC) and a subgroup of head and neck SCC, i.e., those originating in 
the oropharynx. The key events in high-risk HPV (HRHPV)-associated neoplastic
progression include persistent infection, deregulated expression of virus early
genes in basal epithelial cells, local immune suppression and the accumulation of
chromosomal alterations. Evidence for these events particularly comes from
studies of uterine cervical carcinogenesis; primary premalignant HRHPV-positive
lesions of the head and neck mucosa are seldomly detected. Integration of virus
DNA into host chromosomes is considered an important driver of carcinogenesis and
observed in 40 up to 90 % of uterine cervical SCC (UCSCC) and oropharyngeal SCC
(OPSCC), dependent on the integration detection method used and HRHPV type. In
OPSCC, > 90 % HPV-positive tumors are infected with HPV16. Ten up to 60 % of
HPV-positive tumors thus contain extrachromosomal (episomal) virus. In this
chapter, causes and consequences of HPV integration are summarized from the
literature, with special focus on the site of HPV integration in the cellular
genome, and its effect on expression of viral oncogenes (particularly E6 and E7),
on human (tumor) gene expression and on deregulation of cell proliferation,
apoptosis and cell signaling pathways. Also data on DNA methylation, viral load
and clinical outcome in relation to HPV integration are provided.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-43580-0_4 
PMID: 27699529  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
