

584. J Virol. 2012 Apr;86(7):3746-56. doi: 10.1128/JVI.06539-11. Epub 2012 Jan 18.

Regulation of CHMP4/ESCRT-III function in human immunodeficiency virus type 1
budding by CC2D1A.

Usami Y(1), Popov S, Weiss ER, Vriesema-Magnuson C, Calistri A, GÃ¶ttlinger HG.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Gene Function and Expression, Program in Molecular Medicine,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts, USA.

The detachment of human immunodeficiency type 1 (HIV-1) virions depends on CHPM4 
family members, which are late-acting components of the ESCRT pathway that
mediate the cleavage of bud necks from the cytosolic side. We now show that in
human cells, CHMP4 proteins are to a considerable extent bound to two
high-molecular-weight proteins that we have identified as CC2D1A and CC2D1B. Both
proteins bind to the core domain of CHMP4B, which has a strong propensity to
polymerize and to inhibit HIV-1 budding. Further mapping showed that CC2D1A binds
to an N-terminal hairpin within the CHMP4 core that has been implicated in
polymerization. Consistent with a model in which CC2D1A and CC2D1B regulate CHMP4
polymerization, the overexpression of CC2D1A inhibited both the release of
wild-type HIV-1 and the CHMP4-dependent rescue of an HIV-1 L domain mutant by
exogenous ALIX. Furthermore, small interfering RNA against CC2D1A or CC2D1B
increased HIV-1 budding under certain conditions. CC2D1A and CC2D1B possess four 
Drosophila melanogaster 14 (DM14) domains, and we demonstrate that these
constitute novel CHMP4 binding modules. The DM14 domain that bound most avidly to
CHMP4B was by itself sufficient to inhibit the function of ALIX in HIV-1 budding,
indicating that the inhibition occurred through CHMP4 sequestration. However,
N-terminal fragments of CC2D1A that did not interact with CHMP4B nevertheless
retained a significant level of inhibitory activity. Thus, CC2D1A may also affect
HIV-1 budding in a CHMP4-independent manner.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.06539-11 
PMCID: PMC3302528
PMID: 22258254  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
