

595. J Virol Methods. 2012 Dec;186(1-2):99-103. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2012.09.002.
Epub 2012 Sep 7.

Exfoliated cells of the oral mucosa for HPV typing by SPF10 in head and neck
cancer.

Morbini P(1), Dal Bello B, Alberizzi P, Mannarini L, Mevio N, Bertino G, Benazzo 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Section of Pathology, University of Pavia
and Foundation IRCCS Policlinico S. Matteo, Via Forlanini 16, 27100 Pavia, Italy.
patrizia.morbini@unipv.it

HPV infection in the superficial cells of the oral mucosa could reflect the
presence of HPV in head and neck cancer cells. Due mostly to the use of
heterogeneous analytical methods, discordant data exist in the literature
regarding the agreement between the presence of HPV in non-neoplastic oral mucosa
and in tumour tissue from the same patient. The presence of HPV DNA and viral
types were compared in paired cytological and biopsy samples from 56 patients
with head and neck neoplastic and preneoplastic lesions using the highly
sensitive SPF10 LiPA Extra assay, which has been validated recently for
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue using paired cervical cytology and biopsy
samples. Kappa statistics were used to measure the inter-rater agreement. The
overall agreement with respect to HPV infection was 96.43% (kappa=0.8367). For
76.79% of subjects (kappa=0.6937), the same number of HPV types was detected in
cytological and biopsy specimens. The overall positive typing agreement was
90.90%, comprising 130 out of 143 individual HPV type analyses. The agreement
shown was good for HPV 18, 44, 45, 54 and 66 (kappa=0.6585-0. 7321), excellent
for HPV 6, 16, 40, and 54 (kappa=0.8108-0.8679), and absolute for HPV 11, 31, 33,
35, 39, 51, 52, 53, 59, 74, and 69-71 (kappa=1.0000). The high sensitivity of the
SPF10 LiPA and its excellent performance both for recognising HPV infection and
for identifying the viral types present in tumour tissue and in oral exfoliated
cells make it a useful method for the assessment of HPV infection in patients
with head and neck cancer. The excellent agreement for HPV infection and
genotyping in paired samples suggests that oral exfoliated cells can be used for 
HPV detection in the head and neck region.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2012.09.002 
PMID: 22989407  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
