

599. Adv Anat Pathol. 2010 Nov;17(6):394-403. doi: 10.1097/PAP.0b013e3181f895c1.

Human papillomavirus detection in head and neck squamous cell carcinomas.

Snow AN(1), Laudadio J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wake Forest University Baptist Medical Center,
Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.

Squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck (HNSCC) are a frequent diagnosis in
anatomic pathology practice. Tobacco use and heavy alcohol consumption are known 
risk factors for HNSCC but in other cases human papillomavirus (HPV) is linked to
carcinogenesis. HPV proteins E6 and E7 promote oncogenesis by blocking the action
of p53 and pRB, respectively. An absence of p53 mutations in addition to
expression of p16 are part of the distinct molecular profile identified in the
subset of HNSCCs because of HPV. Various methods are available for HPV detection 
but polymerase chain reaction and in situ hybridization techniques are commonly
used. Both methods are amenable for testing formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
tissue that is a sample type readily available to the pathologist. HPV is
detectable in approximately a quarter of all HNSCCs, and is particularly
prevalent in the oropharynx in which the positivity rates approach 40%. A vast
majority of HPV-related HNSCCs are owing to HPV type 16 with types 18, 31, and 33
accounting for almost all of the remaining cases. HPV-related HNSCCs are
associated with better prognosis for both recurrence and survival. This group of 
tumors has also been shown to respond well to radiation treatment. As the
clinical relevance of HPV in HNSCCs continues to emerge, anatomic pathologists
are likely to receive increasing requests for testing. Herein, the authors review
the biological and clinical aspects of HPV-associated HNSCC and review techniques
for HPV detection.

DOI: 10.1097/PAP.0b013e3181f895c1 
PMID: 20966645  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
