

603. J Med Virol. 2009 May;81(5):878-87. doi: 10.1002/jmv.21470.

Demographic and risk factors in patients with head and neck tumors.

Tachezy R(1), Klozar J, Rubenstein L, Smith E, Saláková M, Smahelová J, Ludvíková
V, Rotnáglová E, Kodet R, Hamsíková E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Virology, Institute of Haematology and Blood
Transfusion, Prague, Czech Republic. rutach@uhkt.cz

The association between human papillomavirus (HPV) infection and the development 
of head and neck cancer has been documented recently. In this study on 86 head
and neck cancer patients and 124 controls, data regarding demographics,
behavioral risk factors, and risks related to HPV exposure were collected. HPV
detection was carried out using polymerase chain reaction in the tumors and in
oral exfoliated cells, and HPV typing by a reverse line blot assay specific for
37 HPV types. Sera were tested by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay specific
for HPV proteins. Head and neck cancer cases report significantly more oral-anal 
contact (P = 0.02) and tobacco and alcohol use than controls (P = 0.001; P =
0.02, respectively). High-risk HPV DNA was detected in 43% of oral washings of
cases and 4% of controls (P < 0.0001). The association between the presence of
high-risk HPV DNA in oral exfoliated cells and in tumor tissues was statistically
significant (adjusted P < 0.0001). The prevalence of HPV-specific antibodies was 
significantly higher in cases than in controls (adjusted P < 0.0001). These
results provide epidemiological and immunological evidence for HR HPV as a strong
risk factor (OR = 44.3, P < 0.0001) for head and neck cancer, even after
controlling for age, tobacco and alcohol use. The detection of high-risk HPV DNA 
in oral exfoliated cells and HPV-specific antibodies in serum can be considered
as clinically relevant surrogate markers for the presence of a HPV-associated
head and neck cancer, with a high sensitivity (83%) and specificity (88%).

Copyright 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.21470 
PMID: 19319944  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
