

604. Lin Chung Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2010 May;24(9):414-6.

[In vivo experimental study on nasopharyngeal carcinoma with combination of
pAdKDR-tk/GCV suicide gene therapy system and 60Co radiotherapy].

[Article in Chinese]

Qiu Q(1), Sun W, Chen S, Huang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Guangdong General
Hospital, Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, 510080, China.
qiuqianhui@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To explore the killing effect of pAdKDR-tk/GCV suicide gene therapy
system combined with 60Co radiotherapy on human nasopharyngeal carcinoma in vivo.
METHOD: The pAdKDR-tk/GCV suicide gene therapy system and 60Co radiotherapy were 
used separately or in combination for human nasopharyngeal carcinoma in vivo to
compare their effects. The tumor growth curve and inhibition rate of tumor to the
cure effects of the combination of the pAdKDR-tk/GCV suicide gene therapy system 
and 60Co radiotherapy.
RESULT: The inhibition rate of gene therapy alone and radiotherapy alone in
curing the transplanted tumor in nude mouse subcutaneously was 58.43% and 70.88% 
respectively, and the combined application of gene therapy and radiotherapy
exhibited stronger therapeutic effects (the inhibition rate was 84.39%, P<0.01), 
the mean tumor volume of the combination group was only 13.5% of the mean tumor
volume of compared group, and it was obviously lower than the mean tumor volume
of gene therapy alone and radiotherapy alone in the twenty-first day.
CONCLUSION: The combined application of gene therapy and radiotherapy has an
obviously higher curative effect than simple therapy. This method would establish
a theoretic and clinical basis for the research of combination of suicide gene
system tumor vascular targeting treating and radiotherapy.


PMID: 20669653  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
