

605. J Laryngol Otol. 2018 Apr;132(4):349-355. doi: 10.1017/S0022215117000986. Epub
2017 May 8.

A comparison of oncological outcomes between transoral surgical and non-surgical 
treatment protocols in the management of oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma.

Kao SS(1), Micklem J(1), Ofo E(1), Edwards S(2), Dhatrak D(3), Foreman A(1),
Krishnan S(1), Hodge JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of ENT Head and Neck Surgery,Royal Adelaide Hospital,South
Australia,Australia.
(2)School of Public Health,University of Adelaide,South Australia,Australia.
(3)Department of Anatomical Pathology,SA Pathology,Royal Adelaide Hospital,South 
Australia,Australia.

BACKGROUND: The incidence of oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma in the Western
world is increasing, with the human papillomavirus epidemic implicated in this
observed trend. The optimal treatment modality is yet undetermined regarding
oncological outcomes.
METHODS: This study comprised 98 patients with oropharyngeal squamous cell
carcinoma, treated with either primary transoral surgery with adjuvant therapy or
primary chemoradiotherapy with curative intent, between 2008 and 2012.
Clinicopathological characteristics including tumour-node-metastasis stage, human
papillomavirus status, treatment modality, recurrence and overall survival were
collated.
RESULTS: Five per cent of primary surgical patients had locoregional recurrences 
compared with 25 per cent of primary chemoradiotherapy patients. A lower rate of 
locoregional recurrence was observed in the human papillomavirus positive group.
CONCLUSION: This paper reports higher rates of overall survival and local control
for oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma treated with primary surgery compared
with primary chemoradiotherapy. This reflects overall lower tumour stage and
higher human papillomavirus status in this group.

DOI: 10.1017/S0022215117000986 
PMID: 28480836  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
