

607. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2017 Sep;36(3):435-447. doi: 10.1007/s10555-017-9693-x.

Progression of understanding for the role of Epstein-Barr virus and management of
nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Nakanishi Y(1), Wakisaka N(1), Kondo S(1), Endo K(1), Sugimoto H(1), Hatano M(1),
Ueno T(1), Ishikawa K(1), Yoshizaki T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine,
Kanazawa University, 13-1 Takaramachi, Kanazawa, 920-8640, Japan.
(2)Division of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine,
Kanazawa University, 13-1 Takaramachi, Kanazawa, 920-8640, Japan.
tomoy@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp.

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is very common in southern China and Southeast
Asia. In regions where NPC is endemic, undifferentiated subtypes constitute most 
cases and are invariably associated with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection,
whereas the differentiated subtype is more common in other parts of the world.
Undifferentiated NPC is a unique malignancy with regard to its epidemiology,
etiology, and clinical presentation. Clinically, NPC is highly invasive and
metastatic, but sensitive to both chemotherapy and radiotherapy (RT). Overall
prognosis has dramatically improved over the past three decades because of
advances in management, including the improvement of RT technology, the broader
application of chemotherapy, and more accurate disease staging. Despite the
excellent local control with modern RT, distant failure remains a challenging
problem. Advances in molecular technology have helped to elucidate the molecular 
pathogenesis of NPC. This article reviews the contribution of EBV gene products
to NPC pathogenesis and the current management of NPC.

DOI: 10.1007/s10555-017-9693-x 
PMCID: PMC5613035
PMID: 28819752  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
