

61. Int Rev Immunol. 2014 Oct;33(5):383-401. doi: 10.3109/08830185.2014.911857. Epub 
2014 May 8.

The role of human papilloma virus (HPV) infection in non-anogenital cancer and
the promise of immunotherapy: a review.

Cobos C(1), Figueroa JA, Mirandola L, Colombo M, Summers G, Figueroa A, Aulakh A,
Konala V, Verma R, Riaz J, Wade R, Saadeh C, Rahman RL, Pandey A, Radhi S, Nguyen
DD, Jenkins M, Chiriva-Internati M, Cobos E.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Internal Medicine at the Division of Hematology & Oncology,
Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center and Southwest Cancer Treatment and
Research Center, Lubbock, TX, USA.

Over the past 30 years, human papilloma virus (HPV) has been shown to play a role
in the development of various cancers. Most notably, HPV has been linked to
malignant progression in neoplasms of the anogenital region. However, high-risk
HPV has also been suggested to play a significant role in the development of
cancers in other anatomic locations, such as the head and neck, lung, breast and 
bladder. In 2006, the first vaccine for HPV, Gardasil, was approved for the
prevention of subtypes 6, 11, 16 and 18. A few years later, Cevarix was approved 
for the prevention of subtypes 16 and 18, the HPV subtypes most frequently
implicated in malignant progression. Although increased awareness and vaccination
could drastically decrease the incidence of HPV-positive cancers, these
approaches do not benefit patients who have already contracted HPV and developed 
cancer as a result. For this reason, researchers need to continue developing
treatment modalities, such as targeted immunotherapies, for HPV-positive lesions.
Here, we review the potential evidence linking HPV infection with the development
of non-anogenital cancers and the potential role of immunotherapy in the
prevention and eradication of HPV infection and its oncogenic sequela.

DOI: 10.3109/08830185.2014.911857 
PMID: 24811210  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
