

610. Cancer. 2014 Nov 15;120(22):3477-84. doi: 10.1002/cncr.28909. Epub 2014 Jul 9.

Cytology and human papillomavirus testing on cytobrushing samples from patients
with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Donà MG(1), Giuliani M, Vocaturo A, Spriano G, Pichi B, Rollo F, Ronchetti L,
Covello R, Pescarmona E, Benevolo M.

Author information: 
(1)STI Unit, San Gallicano Dermatological Institute, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The increasing incidence of human papillomavirus (HPV)-related head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) highlights the need for simple and
effective tools to evaluate head and neck lesions and their HPV status. The main 
objective of the current study was to investigate the association between
abnormal cytology and HPV infection, assessed on cytobrushing samples, and
histologically confirmed HNSCC. Second, the authors attempted to investigate
whether HPV status on cytobrushing samples reflected that of the tumoral tissue.
METHODS: A total of 164 samples from HNSCC, nonmalignant lesions, or healthy
mucosae of the oral cavity and oropharynx were collected by cytobrushing in
PreservCyt solution and evaluated by liquid-based cytology and Linear Array HPV
genotyping test. All the findings from the cytologic samples were compared with
those from the corresponding histologic samples.
RESULTS: Patients with abnormal cytology had a significantly higher risk of
having an HNSCC (odds ratio [OR], 9.18; 95% confidence inteval [95% CI],
3.27-26.49). The association was stronger for oral cancer (OR, 10.86; 95% CI,
2.51-51.06) than oropharyngeal cancer (OR, 8.45; 95% CI, 1.62-49.82). HPV
positivity in the oropharyngeal cytobrushing was associated with a nearly 5-fold 
higher risk of having abnormal cytology (OR, 4.57; 95% CI, 1.57-13.57) as well as
histologically proven oropharyngeal cancer (OR, 5.09; 95% CI, 1.09-31.61).
Comparing the HPV status on cytologic and corresponding histologic samples from
patients with HNSCC, we found that 90.4% of the cases were concordant (kappa,
0.796).
CONCLUSIONS: Abnormal brushing cytology is strongly associated with a diagnosis
of HNSCC, whereas HPV positivity on cytobrushing samples is only associated with 
oropharyngeal cancer. HPV testing on cytobrushing samples represents a valid
option for the assessment of HPV infection in patients with oropharyngeal cancer.

© 2014 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28909 
PMID: 25043660  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
