

613. Hear Res. 2011 Jun;276(1-2):44-51. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2011.01.006. Epub 2011
Jan 18.

Development of gene therapy for inner ear disease: Using bilateral vestibular
hypofunction as a vehicle for translational research.

Staecker H(1), Praetorius M, Brough DE.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University of Kansas School of
Medicine, MS 3010, 3901 Rainbow Blvd, Kansas City, KS 66209, USA.
hstaecker@kumc.edu

Despite the significant impact of hearing and balance disorders on the general
population there are currently no dedicated pharmaceuticals that target the inner
ear. Advances in molecular biology and neuroscience have improved our
understanding of the inner ear allowing the development of a range of molecular
targets that have the potential to treat both hearing and balance disorders. One 
of the principal advantages of the inner ear is that it is accessible through a
variety of approaches that would allow a potential to be delivered locally rather
than systemically. This significantly broadens the potential medications that can
be developed and opens the possibility of local gene delivery as a therapeutic
intervention. Several potential clinical targets have been identified including
delivery of neurotrophin expressing genes as an adjunct to cochlear implantation,
delivery of protective genes to prevent trauma and the development of strategies 
for regenerating inner ear sensory cells. In order to translate these potential
therapeutics into humans we will want to optimize the gene delivery methodology, 
dosing and activity of the drug for therapeutic value. To this end we have
developed a series of adenovectors that efficiently transduce the inner ear. The 
use of these gene delivery approaches are attractive for the potential of hair
cell regeneration after loss induced by trauma or ototoxins. This approach is
particularly suited for the development of molecular therapies targeted at the
vestibular system given that no device based therapeutic such a cochlear implant 
available for vestibular loss.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heares.2011.01.006 
PMCID: PMC3109124
PMID: 21251965  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
