

615. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2017 Mar;21(5):922-927.

Association between hepatitis B and hearing status.

Bao SP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Beijing Youan Hospital,
Capital Medical University, Beijing, China. baoshiping@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: This study was performed to investigate the correlation between the
chronic hepatitis B virus infection and hearing status. This study was performed 
to investigate the correlation between the chronic hepatitis B virus infection
and hearing status.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This research was based on 76 hepatitis-B infections as the
case group (including 35 HBV carriers and 41 chronic hepatitis B (CHB) patients) 
and 54 normal cases as the control group. They were selected sequentially and
audiologic tests were performed on the participants.
RESULTS: The average hearing thresholds (HTs) of control group and hepatitis-B
infection were 10.70 and 12.42 dBHL respectively with statistically significant
difference (p < 0.01). Frequency-specific HT of 114 ears in control group and
hepatitis-B infection were found statistical differences for hearing frequency
ranged 250 to 8000 (p < 0.05), and statistically significant differences for 250,
2000 and 4000 Hz (p < 0.01). Significant differences were only measured for HT at
250 Hz frequencies between control and HBV carriers (p < 0.01), while for control
and CHB group, the differences were detected for all tested frequency (p < 0.01).
The SNR for f2 frequencies (553, 1105, 2211, 3125, 4416, 4416, 6250 Hz) of the
CHB patients and HBV carriers were compared with statistical differences (p <
0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: The results showed that the hepatitis-B patients were more prone to 
hearing loss and that the hepatitis B disease can cause hearing loss. The
infection of the inner ear and the pathological changes of the patients with HBV 
infection still need to be further explored.


PMID: 28338205  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
