

618. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2010 Feb;267(2):219-26. doi:
10.1007/s00405-009-1042-4. Epub 2009 Jul 14.

Restriction analysis of otosclerosis-associated CD46 splicing variants.

Csomor P(1), Szalmás A, Kónya J, Sziklai I, Karosi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University of Debrecen
Medical and Health Science Center, Nagyerdei krt. 98, Debrecen, 4032, Hungary.

Otosclerosis is a primary bone remodeling disorder of the human otic capsule and 
is associated with persistent measles virus infection. The human cellular
receptor of measles virus is the membrane cofactor protein (MCP, CD46), which has
14 well-described splicing variants. Unique CD46 expression pattern of the otic
capsule and the stapes footplate may determine the susceptibility for persistent 
measles virus infection. A total of 51 surgically removed ankylotic stapes
footplates were analyzed by histopathological and molecular biological methods,
respectively. Nucleic acids were extracted. Measles virus sequences were detected
by nucleoprotein RNA-specific reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR). Alternatively spliced RNA of CD46 isoforms was amplified by RT-PCR;
cDNA amplimers were separated by SDS poly-acrylamide gel electrophoresis and were
purified from the gel. Complementary DNA of CD46 isoforms was restricted by
endonuclease enzymes having CD46-specific recognition sites. The presence of
viral RNA was associated exclusively with the histopathological diagnosis of
otosclerosis; the stapes specimens with negative measles virus belonged to
non-otosclerotic stapes fixations. All specimens (N = 51) were characterized by
the consecutive expression of five CD46 variants (c, d, e, f and one shorter
unidentified isoform). Histologically confirmed ostosclerotic specimens (N = 21) 
were characterized by increased expression levels of variant "f" and the unknown 
isoform. Increased expression levels of these isoforms and special CD46
expression pattern of the human otic capsule might produce modified or
pathological intracellular signalization that could create the possibility of
persistent measles virus infection.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-009-1042-4 
PMID: 19597833  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
