

625. J Leukoc Biol. 2015 Jul;98(1):5-14. doi: 10.1189/jlb.4HI0714-338RR. Epub 2015 Feb
2.

SAMHD1's protein expression profile in humans.

Schmidt S(1), Schenkova K(1), Adam T(1), Erikson E(1), Lehmann-Koch J(1), Sertel 
S(1), Verhasselt B(1), Fackler OT(1), Lasitschka F(1), Keppler OT(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Institute of Medical Virology, National Reference Center for Retroviruses,
University of Frankfurt, Germany; Department of Infectious Diseases, Integrative 
Virology, Institute of Pathology, and Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck
Surgery, University of Heidelberg, Germany; German Centre for Infection Research,
Heidelberg, Germany; and Department of Clinical Chemistry, Microbiology and
Immunology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(2)*Institute of Medical Virology, National Reference Center for Retroviruses,
University of Frankfurt, Germany; Department of Infectious Diseases, Integrative 
Virology, Institute of Pathology, and Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck
Surgery, University of Heidelberg, Germany; German Centre for Infection Research,
Heidelberg, Germany; and Department of Clinical Chemistry, Microbiology and
Immunology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium oliver.keppler@kgu.de.

Comment in
    J Leukoc Biol. 2015 Jul;98(1):1-3.

The deoxynucleoside triphosphate triphosphohydrolase and 3' → 5' exonuclease
SAMHD1 restricts HIV-1 infection in noncycling hematopoietic cells in vitro, and 
SAMHD1 mutations are associated with AGS. Little is known about the in vivo
expression and functional regulation of this cellular factor. Here, we first
assessed the SAMHD1 protein expression profile on a microarray of 25 human
tissues from >210 donors and in purified primary cell populations. In vivo,
SAMHD1 was expressed in the majority of nucleated cells of hematopoietic origin, 
including tissue-resident macrophages, DCs, pDCs, all developmental stages of
thymic T cells, monocytes, NK cells, as well as at lower levels in B cells. Of
note, SAMHD1 was abundantly expressed in HIV target cells residing in the
anogenital mucosa, providing a basis for its evaluation as a cellular factor that
may impact the efficiency of HIV transmission. Next, we examined the effect of
the activation status and proinflammatory cytokine treatment of cells on
expression and phosphorylation of SAMHD1. Activated, HIV-susceptible CD4(+) T
cells carried pSAMHD1(T592), whereas resting CD4(+) T cells and macrophages
expressed the unphosphorylated protein with HIV-restrictive activity.
Surprisingly, stimulation of these primary cells with IFN-α, IFN-γ, IL-4, IL-6,
IL-12, IL-18, IL-27, or TNF-α affected neither SAMHD1 expression levels nor
threonine 592 phosphorylation. Only IL-1β moderately down-regulated SAMHD1 in
activated CD4(+) T cells. Taken together, this study establishes the first
cross-sectional protein expression profile of SAMHD1 in human tissues and
provides insight into its cell cycle-dependent phosphorylation and
unresponsiveness to multiple proinflammatory cytokines.

© Society for Leukocyte Biology.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.4HI0714-338RR 
PMID: 25646359  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
