

626. J Virol. 2015 Jan;89(1):688-702. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02383-14. Epub 2014 Oct 29.

APOBEC3A functions as a restriction factor of human papillomavirus.

Warren CJ(1), Xu T(1), Guo K(2), Griffin LM(1), Westrich JA(1), Lee D(3), Lambert
PF(3), Santiago ML(4), Pyeon D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of
Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(3)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin-Madison School
of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(4)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of
Medicine, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(5)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of
Medicine, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA
Dohun.Pyeon@ucdenver.edu.

Comment in
    Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 24;6(37):39385-6.

Human papillomaviruses (HPVs) are small DNA viruses causally associated with
benign warts and multiple cancers, including cervical and head-and-neck cancers. 
While the vast majority of people are exposed to HPV, most instances of infection
are cleared naturally. However, the intrinsic host defense mechanisms that block 
the early establishment of HPV infections remain mysterious. Several antiviral
cytidine deaminases of the human APOBEC3 (hA3) family have been identified as
potent viral DNA mutators. While editing of HPV genomes in benign and
premalignant cervical lesions has been demonstrated, it remains unclear whether
hA3 proteins can directly inhibit HPV infection. Interestingly, recent studies
revealed that HPV-positive cervical and head-and-neck cancers exhibited higher
rates of hA3 mutation signatures than most HPV-negative cancers. Here, we report 
that hA3A and hA3B expression levels are highly upregulated in HPV-positive
keratinocytes and cervical tissues in early stages of cancer progression,
potentially through a mechanism involving the HPV E7 oncoprotein. HPV16 virions
assembled in the presence of hA3A, but not in the presence of hA3B or hA3C, have 
significantly decreased infectivity compared to HPV virions assembled without
hA3A or with a catalytically inactive mutant, hA3A/E72Q. Importantly, hA3A
knockdown in human keratinocytes results in a significant increase in HPV
infectivity. Collectively, our findings suggest that hA3A acts as a restriction
factor against HPV infection, but the induction of this restriction mechanism by 
HPV may come at a cost to the host by promoting cancer mutagenesis.IMPORTANCE:
Human papillomaviruses (HPVs) are highly prevalent and potent human pathogens
that cause >5% of all human cancers, including cervical and head-and-neck
cancers. While the majority of people become infected with HPV, only 10 to 20% of
infections are established as persistent infections. This suggests the existence 
of intrinsic host defense mechanisms that inhibit viral persistence. Using a
robust method to produce infectious HPV virions, we demonstrate that hA3A, but
not hA3B or hA3C, can significantly inhibit HPV infectivity. Moreover, hA3A and
hA3B were coordinately induced in HPV-positive clinical specimens during cancer
progression, likely through an HPV E7 oncoprotein-dependent mechanism.
Interestingly, HPV-positive cervical and head-and-neck cancer specimens were
recently shown to harbor significant amounts of hA3 mutation signatures. Our
findings raise the intriguing possibility that the induction of this host
restriction mechanism by HPV may also trigger hA3A- and hA3B-induced cancer
mutagenesis.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02383-14 
PMCID: PMC4301161
PMID: 25355878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
