

630. Hum Gene Ther. 2013 May;24(5):533-44. doi: 10.1089/hum.2012.037. Epub 2013 May 6.

Efficacy of DNA vaccines forming e7 recombinant retroviral virus-like particles
for the treatment of human papillomavirus-induced cancers.

Lescaille G(1), Pitoiset F, Macedo R, Baillou C, Huret C, Klatzmann D, Tartour E,
Lemoine FM, Bellier B.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit UMR CNRS 7211/INSERM 959, 75013 Paris, France.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) is involved in the development of anogenital tumors
and also in the development of oropharyngeal head and neck carcinomas, where
HPV-16, expressing the E6 and E7 oncoproteins, is the most frequent serotype.
Although vaccines encoding L1 and L2 capsid HPV proteins are efficient for the
prevention of HPV infection, they are inadequate for treating established tumors.
Hence, development of innovative vaccine therapies targeting E6/E7 is important
for controlling HPV-induced cancers. We have engineered a nononcogenic mutated
E7-specific plasmo-retroVLP vaccine (pVLP-E7), consisting of plasmid DNA, that is
able to form recombinant retrovirus-based virus-like particles (VLPs) that
display E7 antigen into murine leukemia virus Gag proteins pseudotyped with
vesicular stomatitis virus envelope glycoprotein (VSV-G). pVLP-E7 vaccinations
were studied for their ability to generate specific immune responses and for
induction of protective immunity against tumor cell challenge in preventive and
therapeutic models. The produced VLPs induce the maturation of human dendritic
cells in vitro and mount specific E7 T cell responses. Intradermic vaccinations
of mice with pVLP-E7 show their efficacy to generate antigen-specific T cell
responses, to prevent and protect animals from early TC-1 tumor development
compared with standard DNA or VLP immunizations. The vaccine efficacy was also
evaluated for advanced tumors in mice vaccinated at various time after the
injection of TC-1 cells. Data show that pVLP-E7 vaccination can cure mice with
already established tumors only when combined with Toll-like receptor-7 (TLR7)
and TLR9 agonists. Our findings provide evidence that pVLPs, combining the
advantages of DNA and VLP vaccines, appear to be a promising strategy for the
treatment of HPV-induced cancers.

DOI: 10.1089/hum.2012.037 
PMID: 23521528  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
