

633. Hum Pathol. 2010 Apr;41(4):535-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2009.09.006. Epub 2009
Dec 11.

Expression of p16 in benign and malignant cystic squamous lesions of the neck.

Cao D(1), Begum S, Ali SZ, Westra WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, MO 63100, USA.

Metastatic cystic squamous cell carcinomas of the neck often harbor human
papillomavirus 16 and, in turn, overexpress p16. P16 immunohistochemistry could
be useful in the evaluation of patients who present with cystic squamous lesions 
of the neck, particularly when the distinction between a benign lymphoepithelial 
cyst and a metastatic squamous cell carcinoma cannot be easily resolved on
clinical or pathologic grounds. Implementation of this strategy, however, awaits 
a description of p16 expression in benign lymphoepithelial cysts. The purpose of 
this study was to evaluate p16 staining in cystic squamous lesions of the neck
with an emphasis on benign lymphoepithelial cysts. P16 immunohistochemistry was
performed on tissue sections and fine needle aspirates of benign (n = 49) and
malignant (n = 16) squamous lesions of the neck. P16-positive cases were further 
evaluated by human papillomavirus 16 in situ hybridization. P16 staining was seen
in the tissue sections of 16 of 37 (43%) benign lymphoepithelial cysts. P16
staining tended to localize to regions of the squamous epithelium penetrated by
interdigitating lymphocytes. In the aspirates, p16 staining was noted in 5 of 12 
(42%) benign lymphoepithelial cysts and in 3 of 16 (19%) cystic squamous cell
carcinomas. Human papillomavirus 16 was detected in the 3 p16-positive cystic
squamous cell carcinomas but in none of the p16-positive benign lymphoepithelial 
cysts. P16 overexpression is not always linked to high-risk human papillomavirus 
integration, but may be intrinsic to the reticulated epithelium that lines benign
lymphoepithelial cysts. This observation limits the role of p16 staining as a
surrogate marker of human papillomavirus 16 infection and as a diagnostic tool in
separating benign from malignant cystic squamous lesions of the neck.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2009.09.006 
PMID: 20004950  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
