

638. Lab Invest. 2018 Feb;98(2):258-268. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2017.112. Epub 2017
Oct 16.

Oncogenic Epstein-Barr virus recruits Nm23-H1 to regulate chromatin modifiers.

Pandey S(1)(2), Robertson ES(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, The Tumor Virology
Program, Abramson Cancer Center, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

In cancer progression, metastasis is a major cause of poor survival of patients
and can be targeted for therapeutic interventions. The first discovered
metastatic-suppressor Nm23-H1 possesses nucleoside diphosphate kinase, histidine 
kinase, and DNase activity as a broad-spectrum enzyme. Recent advances in cancer 
metastasis have opened new ways for the development of therapeutic molecular
approaches. In this review, we provide a summary of the current understanding of 
Nm23/NDPKs in the context of viral oncogenesis. We also focused on
Nm23-H1-mediated cellular events with an emphasis on chromatin modifications. How
Nm23-H1 modulates the activities of chromatin modifiers through interaction with 
Epstein-Barr virus-encoded oncogenic antigens and related crosstalks are
discussed in the context of other oncogenic viruses. We also described the
current understanding of the cellular and viral interactions of Nm23-H1 and their
reference to transcription regulation and metastasis. Further, we summarized the 
recent therapeutic approaches targeting Nm23 and its potential links to pathways 
that can be exploited by oncogenic viruses.

DOI: 10.1038/labinvest.2017.112 
PMCID: PMC6053075
PMID: 29035376  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
