

640. Anticancer Res. 2013 Mar;33(3):913-6.

The role of p16 expression as a predictive marker in HPV-positive oral SCCHN--a
retrospective single-center study.

Geißler C(1), Tahtali A, Diensthuber M, Gassner D, Stöver T, Wagenblast J.

Author information: 
(1)ENT Department, University Hospital, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590
Frankfurt/Main, Germany.

Squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN) is the sixth most common
type of cancer worldwide; 600,000 new cases are diagnosed every year. Infected
with high-risk human papilloma virus (HPV) types are particularly linked to
oropharyngeal cancer. Among over 100 different HPV types, HPV-16 and HPV-18 are
detected in the majority of HPV-positive SCCHNs. The p16 gene is often mutated in
SCCHN, its overexpression is caused by the viral E7 protein. Consequently, p16 is
assumed to be an indirect marker of HPV-induced SCCHN. The aim of the present
study was to determine the role of p16 expression as a predictive marker of HPV
infection in SCCHN tumors in a retrospective single-center study.MATERIALS AND
METHODS: Oropharyngeal tumor samples from 45 patients (34 males, 11 females) were
analyzed. Tumor samples were examined for HPV infection using a two-step PCR. p16
staining by immunohistochemistry was then performed.
RESULTS: Samples with strong p16 signal were typed HPV-16-positive. Out of 14
tumor samples with HPV-positive PCR results, 13 samples contained the high risk
variant HPV-16. In one sample, HPV-6 DNA was detected. All HPV-16-positive tumors
overexpressed p16 (p16(+++)), whereas the HPV-6 sample was p16-negative.
CONCLUSION: p16 is not a surrogate marker for replacing PCR testing, but both
methods in combination, PCR and immunohistochemistry, could lead to a higher
diagnostic validation.


PMID: 23482761  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
