

644. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2014 Oct;22(9):e41-4. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e318244ff6a.

Study of squamous cell carcinoma associated with syringofibroadenoma for 105
types of human papillomavirus and for all currently known types of
polyomaviruses.

Fernandez-Flores A(1), Suarez-Penaranda JM, Halec G, Michael KM, Schmitt M.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, Hospital El Bierzo, Ponferrada †Department of
Pathology, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario Santiago de Compostela ‡Department
of Pathology, University of Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain
§Division of Genome Modifications and Carcinogenesis, Infections and Cancer
Program, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) ∥Molecular Biology Laboratory,
Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Heidelberg University,
Heidelberg, Germany.

Syringofibroadenoma is a benign tumor of the eccrine glands. Few cases of
association with squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) have been published in the
literature. In one of them, infection by human papillomavirus (HPV) type-107 was 
detected and the authors postulated that the virus might play a carcinogenic
role. We studied a case of syringofibroadenoma associated with an SCC on the back
of the right hand of an immunocompetent 95-year-old man. The lesion showed strong
diffuse cytoplasmic staining for cytokeratin (CK) AE1/AE3, CK5/6, and 34βE12 in
the areas of syringofibroadenoma and in the areas of SCC. The marker p63 was
expressed by the lower two thirds of the epithelium of the syringofibroadenoma.
Epithelial membrane antigen and CK18 were expressed only by the superficial
layers of the syringofibroadenomatous epithelium. The carcinomatous areas were
epithelial membrane antigen positive. MIB1, p16, and p53 were mainly expressed by
the SCC areas. The lesion was negative for all mucosal and cutaneous genus α-HPV,
and for cutaneous HPV from γ-, μ-, and ν-genera. In 3 repeated genotyping
experiments analyzing DNA from 2 consecutive biopsy sections, β-HPV-9, 20, 36,
47, and 75, as well as FA-22 and 51 were found only once in the 6 possible
reactions. β-HPV-8 and 96 were detected 2 and 4 times, respectively, indicating
very low viral loads of these HPV types. None of 8 known polyomaviruses was
identified. β-globin positivity was present in each assay, confirming sufficient 
quality of analyzed DNA.

DOI: 10.1097/PAI.0b013e318244ff6a 
PMID: 22495378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
