

66. Semin Cancer Biol. 2014 Jun;26:13-21. doi: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2013.11.002. Epub 
2013 Dec 4.

The human papillomavirus family and its role in carcinogenesis.

Tommasino M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Infections and Cancer Biology Group, International Agency for Research on
Cancer - World Health Organization, 150 Cours Albert-Thomas, 69372 Lyon cedex 08,
France. Electronic address: tommasino@iarc.fr.

Human papillomaviruses (HPVs) are a family of small double-stranded DNA viruses
that have a tropism for the epithelia of the genital and upper respiratory tracts
and for the skin. Approximately 150 HPV types have been discovered so far, which 
are classified into several genera based on their DNA sequence. Approximately 15 
high-risk mucosal HPV types are clearly associated with cervical cancer; HPV16
and HPV18 are the most carcinogenic since they are responsible for approximately 
50% and 20% of all cervical cancers worldwide, respectively. It is now also clear
that these viruses are linked to a subset of other genital cancers, as well as
head and neck cancers. Due to their high level of carcinogenic activity, HPV16
and HPV18 are the most studied HPV types so far. Biological studies have
highlighted the key roles in cellular transformation of the products of two viral
early genes, E6 and E7. Many of the mechanisms of E6 and E7 in subverting the
regulation of fundamental cellular events have been fully characterized,
contributing not only to our knowledge of how the oncogenic viruses promote
cancer development but also to our understanding of basic cell biology. Despite
HPV research resulting in extraordinary achievements in the last four decades,
significantly improving the screening and prophylaxis of HPV-induced lesions,
additional research is necessary to characterize the biology and epidemiology of 
the vast number of HPV types that have been poorly investigated so far, with a
final aim of clarifying their potential roles in other human diseases.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2013.11.002 
PMID: 24316445  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
