

664. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 7;10(7):e0132669. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132669.
eCollection 2015.

Nasopharyngeal Epstein-Barr Virus Load: An Efficient Supplementary Method for
Population-Based Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma Screening.

Chen Y(1), Zhao W(2), Lin L(3), Xiao X(4), Zhou X(4), Ming H(4), Huang T(5), Liao
J(6), Li Y(6), Zeng X(3), Huang G(5), Ye W(7), Zhang Z(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of
Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, China; Key Laboratory of
High-Incidence-Tumor Prevention & Treatment (Guangxi Medical University),
Ministry of Education, Nanning, Guangxi, China; Department of Epidemiology,
School of public health, Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, China.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of
Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, China; Department of Environmental 
and Molecular Medicine, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine, Mie, Japan.
(3)Key Laboratory of High-Incidence-Tumor Prevention & Treatment (Guangxi Medical
University), Ministry of Education, Nanning, Guangxi, China; Department of
Epidemiology, School of public health, Guangxi Medical University, Nanning,
Guangxi, China.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of
Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, China.
(5)Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of
Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, China; Key Laboratory of
High-Incidence-Tumor Prevention & Treatment (Guangxi Medical University),
Ministry of Education, Nanning, Guangxi, China.
(6)Cancer Institute of Cangwu County, Wuzhou, Guangxi, China.
(7)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.

Serological detection of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) antibodies is frequently used
in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) mass screening. However, the large number of
seropositive subjects who require close follow-up is still a big burden. The
present study aimed to detect the nasopharyngeal EBV load in a high-risk
population seropositive for antibodies against EBV, as well as to examine whether
assay for nasopharyngeal EBV DNA load might reduce the number of high-risk
subjects for follow-up and improve early detection of NPC. A prospective and
population-based cohort study was conducted in southern China from 2006 through
2013. Among 22,186 participants, 1045 subjects with serum immunoglobulin A (IgA) 
antibodies against viral capsid antigen (VCA) titers ≥ 1:5 were defined as
high-risk group, and were then followed-up for NPC occurrence. Qualified
nasopharyngeal swab specimens were available from 905 participants and used for
quantitative PCR assay. Our study revealed that 89% (802/905) subjects showed
positive EBV DNA in nasopharyngeal swab. The nasopharyngeal EBV load in females
was higher than that in males. The nasopharyngeal EBV load increased with
increasing serum VCA/IgA titers. Eight cases of newly diagnosed NPC showed an
extremely elevated EBV load, and 87.5% (7 of 8 patients) were early-stage NPCs.
The EBV loads of 8 NPCs were significantly higher than those of 897 NPC-free
subjects (mean, 2.8 × 10(6) copies/swab [range 4.8 × 10(4)-1.1 × 10(8)] vs. 5.6 ×
10(3) [range 0-3.8 × 10(6)]). Using mean EBV load in NPC-free population plus two
standard deviations as cut-off value, a higher diagnostic performance was
obtained for EBV load test than serum VCA/IgA test (area under ROC, 0.980 vs
0.895). In conclusion, in a prospective and population-based study we
demonstrated that an additional assay of EBV load in the nasopharynx among
high-risk individuals may reduce the number of subjects needed to be closely
followed up and could serve as part of a NPC screening program in high-risk
populations.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132669 
PMCID: PMC4495031
PMID: 26151639  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
