

666. Head Neck. 2011 Apr;33(4):581-6. doi: 10.1002/hed.21421.

Human papillomavirus infections in laryngeal cancer.

Torrente MC(1), Rodrigo JP, Haigentz M Jr, Dikkers FG, Rinaldo A, Takes RP,
Olofsson J, Ferlito A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Otorrinolaringologia, Universidad de Chile, Santiago de Chile,
Chile.

Although the association and clinical significance of human papillomavirus (HPV) 
infections with a subset of head and neck cancers, particularly for oropharyngeal
carcinoma, has recently been well documented, the involvement of HPV in laryngeal
cancer has been inadequately evaluated. Herein we review the currently known
associations of HPV infections in diseases of the larynx and their potential for 
oncogenicity. Using several methods of detection, HPV DNA has been detected in
benign (papillomatosis), indolent (verrucous carcinoma), and malignant (squamous 
cell carcinoma) lesions of the larynx. Consistent with the known oncogenic risk
of HPV infections, common HPV types associated with laryngeal papillomatosis
include low-risk HPV types 6 and 11, with high-risk HPV types 16 and 18 more
commonly present in neoplastic lesions (verrucous carcinoma and squamous cell
carcinoma). Although a broad range of prevalence has been noted in individual
studies, approximately 25% of laryngeal squamous cell carcinomas harbor HPV
infections on meta-analysis, with common involvement of high-risk HPV types 16
(highest frequency) and 18. Preliminary results suggest that these high-risk HPV 
infections seem to be biologically relevant in laryngeal carcinogenesis,
manifested as having viral DNA integration in the cancer cell genome and
increased expression of the p16 protein. Despite this knowledge, the clinical
significance of these infections and the implications on disease prevention and
treatment are unclear and require further investigation.

Copyright Â© 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hed.21421 
PMID: 20848441  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
