

669. J Virol. 2015 Mar;89(5):2684-97. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03189-14. Epub 2014 Dec 17.

Clustered microRNAs of the Epstein-Barr virus cooperatively downregulate an
epithelial cell-specific metastasis suppressor.

Kanda T(1), Miyata M(2), Kano M(3), Kondo S(3), Yoshizaki T(3), Iizasa H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Microbiology and Oncology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute,
Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan tkanda@aichi-cc.jp.
(2)Division of Microbiology and Oncology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute,
Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan.
(3)Division of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Graduate School of Medical
Science, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Shimane University Faculty of Medicine, Izumo,
Shimane, Japan.

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) encodes its own microRNAs (miRNAs); however, their
biological roles remain elusive. The commonly used EBV B95-8 strain lacks a 12-kb
genomic region, known as BamHI A rightward transcripts (BART) locus, where a
number of BART miRNAs are encoded. Here, bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC)
technology was used to generate an EBV B95-8 strain in which the 12-kb region was
fully restored at its native locus [BART(+) virus]. Epithelial cells were stably 
infected with either the parental B95-8 virus or the BART(+) virus, and BART
miRNA expression was successfully reconstituted in the BART(+) virus-infected
cells. Microarray analyses of cellular gene expression identified N-myc
downstream regulated gene 1 (NDRG1) as a putative target of BART miRNAs. The
NDRG1 protein was barely expressed in B cells, highly expressed in epithelial
cells, including primary epithelial cells, and strongly downregulated in the
BART(+) virus-infected epithelial cells of various origins. Although in vitro
reporter assays identified BART22 as being responsible for the NDRG1
downregulation, EBV genetic analyses revealed that BART22 was not solely
responsible; rather, the entire BART miRNA cluster 2 was responsible for the
downregulation. Immunohistochemical analyses revealed that the expression level
of the NDRG1 protein was downregulated significantly in EBV-positive
nasopharyngeal carcinoma specimens. Considering that NDRG1 encodes an epithelial 
differentiation marker and a suppressor of metastasis, these data implicate a
causative relationship between BART miRNA expression and epithelial
carcinogenesis in vivo.IMPORTANCE: EBV-related epithelial cancers, such as
nasopharyngeal carcinomas and EBV-positive gastric cancers, encompass more than
80% of EBV-related malignancies. Although it is known that they express high
levels of virally encoded BART miRNAs, how these miRNAs contribute to
EBV-mediated epithelial carcinogenesis remains unknown. Although a number of
screenings have been performed to identify targets of viral miRNAs, many targets 
likely have not been identified, especially in case of epithelial cell infection.
This is the first study to use EBV genetics to perform unbiased screens of
cellular genes that are differentially expressed in viral miRNA-positive and
-negative epithelial cells. The result indicates that multiple EBV-encoded miRNAs
cooperatively downregulate NDRG1, an epithelial differentiation marker and
suppressor of metastasis. The experimental system described in this study should 
be useful for further clarifying the mechanism of EBV-mediated epithelial
carcinogenesis.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.03189-14 
PMCID: PMC4325718
PMID: 25520514  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
