

671. Mutat Res Rev Mutat Res. 2017 Apr - Jun;772:51-66. doi:
10.1016/j.mrrev.2016.06.005. Epub 2016 Jun 22.

Clinical relevance and implications of HPV-induced neoplasia in different
anatomical locations.

Prigge ES(1), von Knebel Doeberitz M(1), Reuschenbach M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Tumor Biology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Heidelberg, and Clinical Cooperation Unit Applied Tumor Biology, German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Department of Applied Tumor Biology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Heidelberg, and Clinical Cooperation Unit Applied Tumor Biology, German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address:
miriam.reuschenbach@med.uni-heidelberg.de.

Human papillomaviruses (HPV) are widespread DNA viruses that can infect
epithelial cells of the skin and mucosa. Most HPV infections remain clinically
unapparent and clear spontaneously. In few cases, however, HPV infections persist
and can cause benign and malignant neoplasms at different anatomic locations.
Malignant HPV-induced neoplasms are caused by distinct types of HPV (oncogenic or
high-risk (HR) HPV types) and present in the anogenital (anus, penis, uterine
cervix, vagina and vulva) and head and neck (particularly oropharynx) region. In 
the anogenital region defined precancerous stages precede invasive cancer. In the
head and neck region there is clear evidence only for the invasive stage of
HPV-induced neoplasia. In early infection stages the HPV oncogenes (E6/E7) are
under tight control in the basal and parabasal cell layers. In more advanced
precancerous stages increased expression of the HPV oncogenes E6 and E7 occurs
(transforming infection) that may result in transformation of these cells. The
defined carcinogenesis in the anogenital tract enables cancer early detection,
particularly at the uterine cervix where cytologic and molecular tests contribute
to early diagnosis and treatment at a non-invasive stage. Up to now, the
treatment of HPV-related precancerous stages (high-grade intraepithelial
neoplasia) and cancer is not specifically targeting molecular characteristics of 
the virus. This article reviews the current state and new developments in
epidemiology, prevention, diagnosis and treatment of HPV-associated neoplasia in 
various anatomic locations.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mrrev.2016.06.005 
PMID: 28528690  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
