

673. Lung Cancer. 2013 Mar;79(3):215-20. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.11.018. Epub 2012
Dec 14.

Human papilloma virus genome is rare in North American non-small cell lung
carcinoma patients.

Yanagawa N(1), Wang A, Kohler D, Santos Gda C, Sykes J, Xu J, Pintilie M, Tsao
MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Health Network, Princess Margaret Hospital
site and Ontario Cancer Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The reported prevalence for presence of human papillomavirus (HPV) genome in lung
cancer varies across the world, and limited data are available for North America.
P16 immunostaining is used as a surrogate marker for the presence of HPV in
cervical and head and neck cancers. In non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC), the
association between P16 protein overexpression and HPV remains unclear. We
investigated the presence of HPV genome by in situ hybridization (ISH) and
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and P16 or Rb protein expression by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) in 336 surgically resected primary NSCLC: 204
adenocarcinoma (AdC) and 132 squamous cell carcinoma (SqCC). HPV genome was
detected in 5 (1.5%) of 336 tumors studied by both ISH and PCR; all of them were 
typed as HPV16 and found in SqCC (3.8%). Despite being solitary tumors and
clinically considered as primary lung cancers, all 5 patients had past history of
HPV associated squamous cell carcinomas of other organ sites, thus highly
suggestive of being metastases. P16 immunostaining was found in 137 (40.8%)
tumors, with 109 (32.4%) showing high level expression. All HPV positive (+)
cases showed P16 high expression. P16 and Rb protein expressions were inversely
correlated (P<0.001), suggesting that the high P16 expression is largely driven
by non-HPV loss of Rb protein expression. We conclude that HPV is not or rarely
associated with NSCLC in Canadian and most likely North American patients, and
P16 immunostaining is not a surrogate marker for its presence.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.11.018 
PMID: 23254264  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
