

675. Gynecol Oncol. 2010 May;117(2 Suppl):S5-10. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2010.01.024.

Pathology and epidemiology of HPV infection in females.

Stanley M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, UK. mas1001@cam.ac.uk

Human papillomaviruses (HPVs) are a large family of small double-stranded DNA
viruses that infect squamous epithelia. It has been established that infection
with specific HPV types is a contributing factor to different types of anogenital
cancer, including vulval, vaginal, anal, penile, and head and neck cancers.
Approximately 4% of all cancers are associated with HPV. HPV infection is the
major cause of cervical cancer and genital warts. Genital HPV infections are very
common, are sexually transmitted, and have a peak prevalence between ages 18 and 
30. Most of these infections clear spontaneously, but in 10-20% of women, these
infections remain persistent and are at risk of progression to grade 2/3 cervical
intraepithelial neoplasm (CIN) and eventually to invasive cancer of the cervix
(ICC). CINs are genetically unstable lesions with a 30-40% risk of progression to
ICC. If left untreated, they form a spectrum of increasing cytological atypia,
ranging from low-grade CIN1 to high-grade CIN3; the latter are caused almost
exclusively by high-risk HPVs, HPV 16 and 18. Infection with HPV requires a
microabrasion in the genital epithelium. The oncogenic properties of high-risk
HPV reside in the E6 and E7 genes, which if inappropriately expressed in dividing
cells deregulate cell division and differentiation. HPV DNA testing has been
shown consistently to be superior to cytology in terms of sensitivity and
positive predictive value and will become a major tool in cervical cancer
screening, at least in the developed countries.

Copyright Â© 2010. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2010.01.024 
PMID: 20304221  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
