

687. PLoS Pathog. 2017 Jul 24;13(7):e1006500. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006500.
eCollection 2017 Jul.

An essential EBV latent antigen 3C binds Bcl6 for targeted degradation and cell
proliferation.

Pei Y(1), Banerjee S(1), Jha HC(1), Sun Z(1), Robertson ES(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, and Microbiology, the
Tumor Virology Program, Abramson Comprehensive Cancer Center, Perelman School of 
Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United
States of America.

The latent EBV nuclear antigen 3C (EBNA3C) is required for transformation of
primary human B lymphocytes. Most mature B-cell malignancies originate from
malignant transformation of germinal center (GC) B-cells. The GC reaction appears
to have a role in malignant transformation, in which a major player of the GC
reaction is Bcl6, a key regulator of this process. We now demonstrate that EBNA3C
contributes to B-cell transformation by targeted degradation of Bcl6. We show
that EBNA3C can physically associate with Bcl6. Notably, EBNA3C expression leads 
to reduced Bcl6 protein levels in a ubiquitin-proteasome dependent manner.
Further, EBNA3C inhibits the transcriptional activity of the Bcl6 promoter
through interaction with the cellular protein IRF4. Bcl6 degradation induced by
EBNA3C rescued the functions of the Bcl6-targeted downstream regulatory proteins 
Bcl2 and CCND1, which resulted in increased proliferation and G1-S transition.
These data provide new insights into the function of EBNA3C in B-cell
transformation during GC reaction, and raises the possibility of developing new
targeted therapies against EBV-associated cancers.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006500 
PMCID: PMC5524291
PMID: 28738086  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
