

696. MBio. 2014 Dec 23;5(6). pii: e02234-14. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02234-14.

Human papillomavirus E6 triggers upregulation of the antiviral and cancer genomic
DNA deaminase APOBEC3B.

Vieira VC, Leonard B(1), White EA(2), Starrett GJ(1), Temiz NA(1), Lorenz LD(3), 
Lee D(3), Soares MA, Lambert PF(3), Howley PM(2), Harris RS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics Department, Masonic Cancer
Center, Institute for Molecular Virology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
Minnesota, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(3)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin-Madison School
of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(4)Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics Department, Masonic Cancer
Center, Institute for Molecular Virology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
Minnesota, USA rsh@umn.edu.

Several recent studies have converged upon the innate immune DNA cytosine
deaminase APOBEC3B (A3B) as a significant source of genomic uracil lesions and
mutagenesis in multiple human cancers, including those of the breast, head/neck, 
cervix, bladder, lung, ovary, and other tissues. A3B is upregulated in these
tumor types relative to normal tissues, but the mechanism is unclear. Because A3B
also has antiviral activity in multiple systems and is a member of the broader
innate immune response, we tested the hypothesis that human papillomavirus (HPV) 
infection causes A3B upregulation. We found that A3B mRNA expression and
enzymatic activity were upregulated following transfection of a high-risk HPV
genome and that this effect was abrogated by inactivation of E6. Transduction
experiments showed that the E6 oncoprotein alone was sufficient to cause A3B
upregulation, and a panel of high-risk E6 proteins triggered higher A3B levels
than did a panel of low-risk or noncancer E6 proteins. Knockdown experiments in
HPV-positive cell lines showed that endogenous E6 is required for A3B
upregulation. Analyses of publicly available head/neck cancer data further
support this relationship, as A3B levels are higher in HPV-positive cancers than 
in HPV-negative cancers. Taken together with the established role for high-risk
E6 in functional inactivation of TP53 and published positive correlations in
breast cancer between A3B upregulation and genetic inactivation of TP53, our
studies suggest a model in which high-risk HPV E6, possibly through functional
inactivation of TP53, causes derepression of A3B gene transcription. This would
lead to a mutator phenotype that explains the observed cytosine mutation biases
in HPV-positive head/neck and cervical cancers.IMPORTANCE: The innate immune DNA 
cytosine deaminase APOBEC3B (A3B) accounts for a large proportion of somatic
mutations in cervical and head/neck cancers, but nothing is known about the
mechanism responsible for its upregulation in these tumor types. Almost all
cervical carcinomas and large proportions of head/neck tumors are caused by human
papillomavirus (HPV) infection. Here, we establish a mechanistic link between HPV
infection and A3B upregulation. The E6 oncoprotein of high-risk, but not
low-risk, HPV types triggers A3B upregulation, supporting a model in which TP53
inactivation causes a derepression of A3B gene transcription and elevated A3B
enzyme levels. This virus-induced mutator phenotype provides a mechanistic
explanation for A3B signature mutations observed in HPV-positive head/neck and
cervical carcinomas and may also help to account for the preferential cancer
predisposition caused by high-risk HPV isolates.

Copyright Â© 2014 Vieira et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02234-14 
PMCID: PMC4278539
PMID: 25538195  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
