

70. J Int Med Res. 2014 Oct;42(5):1093-101. doi: 10.1177/0300060514543041. Epub 2014 
Aug 18.

Prevalence of human papillomavirus and Epstein-Barr virus in salivary gland
diseases.

Lin FC(1), Chen PL(2), Tsao TY(3), Li CR(4), Jeng KC(4), Tsai SC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan
Department of Surgery, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Tungs' Taichung Metro Harbour Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan Department of Medical Research, Tungs' Taichung Metro Harbour Hospital,
Taichung, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Pathology, Tungs' Taichung Metro Harbour Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan.
(4)Department of Medical Research, Tungs' Taichung Metro Harbour Hospital,
Taichung, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Medical Research, Tungs' Taichung Metro Harbour Hospital,
Taichung, Taiwan Department of Otolaryngology, Tungs' Taichung Metro Harbour
Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan Department of Food and Nutrition, Providence
University, Taichung, Taiwan tsaistella111@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: The roles of human papillomavirus (HPV) and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
in head and neck neoplasms have been well reported, but little is known about
their relationship with salivary gland tumours. This study investigated the
presence of HPV and EBV in salivary gland diseases.
METHODS: The presence of HPV 16/18 and EBV was analysed in archival pathological 
specimens collected from patients who had undergone surgery for salivary gland
diseases. HPV 16/18 DNA was detected using nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
and further confirmed with immunohistochemistry. EBV DNA was detected using
real-time PCR.
RESULTS: A total of 61 pathological specimens were examined: 39.5% (15/38) of
pleomorphic adenomas, 33.3% (3/9) of Warthin's tumours, 33.3% (one of 3) of
mucoepidermoid carcinomas, and 25.0% (one of 4) of benign lymphoepithelial
lesions were positive for high-risk HPV 16/18. Only two Warthin's tumours were
positive for EBV.
CONCLUSION: The infectious nature of salivary gland neoplasms was revealed by the
high prevalence of HPV infection, and the specific presence of EBV in Warthin's
tumours, suggesting a potential role for HPV and EBV in salivary gland diseases.

Â© The Author(s) 2014 Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav.

DOI: 10.1177/0300060514543041 
PMID: 25136053  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
