

706. J Korean Med Sci. 2017 Nov;32(11):1857-1860. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2017.32.11.1857.

Clevudine Induced Mitochondrial Myopathy.

Park SH(1), Park KS(2), Kim NH(3), Cho JY(4), Koh MS(5), Lee JH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Dongguk University Ilsan Hospital, Goyang, Korea.
(2)Department of Neurology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea.
(3)Department of Neurology, Dongguk University Ilsan Hospital, Goyang, Korea.
nheekim8@hanmail.net.
(4)Department of Neurology, Inje University Ilsan Paik Hospital, Inje University 
College of Medicine, Goyang, Korea.
(5)Department of Hepatology, Dongguk University Ilsan Hospital, Goyang, Korea.

Clevudine was approved as an antiviral agent for hepatitis B virus, which showed 
marked, rapid inhibition of virus replication without significant toxicity.
However, several studies have reported myopathy associated with clevudine
therapy. Also, we experienced seven patients who suffered from myopathy during
clevudine therapy. To characterize clevudine-induced myopathy, we collected
previously reported cases of clevudine myopathy and analyzed all the cases
including our cases. We searched electronic databases that were published in
English or Korean using PubMed and KoreaMed. Ninety-five cases with clevudine
myopathy, including our seven cases, were selected and analyzed for the
demographic data, clinical features, and pathologic findings. The 95 patients
with clevudine-induced myopathy comprised 52 women and 43 men aged 48.9 years
(27-76 years). The patients received clevudine therapy for about 14.2 months
(5-24 months) before the development of symptoms. Weakness mainly involved
proximal extremities, especially in the lower extremities, and bulbar and neck
weakness were observed in some cases (13.7%). Creatine kinase was elevated in the
majority of patients (97.9%). Myopathic patterns on electromyography were
observed in most patients examined (98.1%). Muscle biopsy presented patterns
compatible with mitochondrial myopathy in the majority (90.2%). The weakness
usually improved within about 3 months after the discontinuation of clevudine.
Though clevudine has been known to be safe in a 6-month clinical trial, longer
clevudine therapy for about 14 months may cause reversible mitochondrial
myopathy. Careful clinical attention should be paid to patients with long-term
clevudine therapy.

Â© 2017 The Korean Academy of Medical Sciences.

DOI: 10.3346/jkms.2017.32.11.1857 
PMCID: PMC5639069
PMID: 28960041  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
