

709. Virology. 2011 Mar 15;411(2):229-36. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2010.12.003. Epub 2011 
Jan 14.

Influenza virus assembly and budding.

Rossman JS(1), Lamb RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL
60208-3500, USA.

Influenza A virus causes seasonal epidemics, sporadic pandemics and is a
significant global health burden. Influenza virus is an enveloped virus that
contains a segmented negative strand RNA genome. Assembly and budding of progeny 
influenza virions is a complex, multi-step process that occurs in lipid raft
domains on the apical membrane of infected cells. The viral proteins
hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) are targeted to lipid rafts, causing
the coalescence and enlargement of the raft domains. This clustering of HA and NA
may cause a deformation of the membrane and the initiation of the virus budding
event. M1 is then thought to bind to the cytoplasmic tails of HA and NA where it 
can then polymerize and form the interior structure of the emerging virion. M1,
bound to the cytoplasmic tails of HA and NA, additionally serves as a docking
site for the recruitment of the viral RNPs and may mediate the recruitment of M2 
to the site of virus budding. M2 initially stabilizes the site of budding,
possibly enabling the polymerization of the matrix protein and the formation of
filamentous virions. Subsequently, M2 is able to alter membrane curvature at the 
neck of the budding virus, causing membrane scission and the release of the
progeny virion. This review investigates the latest research on influenza virus
budding in an attempt to provide a step-by-step analysis of the assembly and
budding processes for influenza viruses.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2010.12.003 
PMCID: PMC3086653
PMID: 21237476  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
