

710. J Thorac Oncol. 2014 Jun;9(6):865-71. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000166.

Human papillomavirus shows highly variable prevalence in esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma and no significant correlation to p16INK4a overexpression: a systematic
review.

Michaelsen SH(1), Larsen CG, von Buchwald C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery and Audiology
University Hospital Rigshospitalet, Blegdamsvej 9, 2100 Copenhagen Ã˜, Denmark.

INTRODUCTION: This review investigates the role of p16(INK4a) as a marker of
transcriptionally active human papillomavirus (HPV) in esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC) and the regional prevalence of HPV in ESCC.
METHODS: PubMed, EMBASE, and the Cochrane Library were systematically searched
with the purpose of identifying all studies published between January 1980 and
July 2013 reporting both HPV and p16 results in a minimum of five human ESCC
specimens.
RESULTS: Twelve studies were identified, providing data on a total of 1383 ESCC
specimens collected between 1987 and 2009 from 10 different countries. HPV DNA
was detected in 12.0% (n = 161) of 1347 specimens, and p16(INK4a) was detected in
33.9% (n = 209) of 617 specimens. The HPV presence varied from 0% to 70% among
the studies. The prevalence of p16(INK4a) overexpression in HPV-positive and
HPV-negative specimens demonstrated no statistically significant difference,
neither for the combined data (p = 0.7507) nor for any individual study, and
detection of p16(INK4a) overexpression did not affect the odds of tumors being
HPV positive (odds ratio = 1.0666 with 95% confidence interval 0.7040-1.6157). In
a pooled analysis, the sensitivity of p16(INK4a) overexpression as a marker of
HPV DNA presence was 0.35, the specificity 0.67, and the positive predictive
value 0.25.
CONCLUSIONS: This systematic review reports great regional variation in the
prevalence of HPV in ESCC and suggests that p16(INK4a) is not a reliable marker
of HPV status in ESCC.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000166 
PMID: 24787962  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
