

718. J Med Virol. 2015 Jun;87(6):1054-9. doi: 10.1002/jmv.24147. Epub 2015 Mar 5.

Immunohistochemical- and PCR-based assay for the reproducible, routine detection 
of erythrovirus B19 in thyroid tissues.

Page C(1), Hoffmann TW, Benzerdjeb N, Desailloud R, Sevestre H, Duverlie G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Face and Neck Surgery and ENT, Amiens University Hospital,
Amiens, France.

Comment in
    CMAJ. 2016 Feb 16;188(3):217.

It is generally accepted that thyroid follicle cells are at least semi-permissive
for erythrovirus B19 (EVB19). Thus, various laboratory techniques have been
successfully used to detect EVB19 in the thyroid gland, including polymerase
chain reaction (PCR), immunohistochemistry, and in situ hybridization. However,
the detection of EVB19 within the thyroid gland is problematic, and none of the
detection protocols in the literature have been unequivocally validated. This
multidisciplinary study in which 32 thyroidectomy subjects undergoing
thyroidectomy in a French University hospital were prospectively recruited was
performed over a period of 3 years. Prior to surgery, all the subjects were
assayed for blood levels of anti-EVB19 antibodies and (using a quantitative PCR
[qPCR] assay) EVB19 itself. A qPCR assay for EVB19 and an immunohistochemical
assay (based on polyclonal anti-VP2 antibodies) were performed on the
thyroidectomy samples. None of the subjects had an acute EVB19 infection. A viral
load was detected in two serum samples and six thyroid biopsies. Three subjects
had both a positive immunohistochemical assay and a positive qPCR assay for the
thyroid tissue. It is noteworthy that the thyroid immunohistochemical and qPCR
assays were negative in the two patients with detectable serum loads of EVB19. In
conclusion, EVB19 can be detected in thyroid follicle cells by using
immunohistochemical and qPCR assays. Ideally, patients should be tested with both
PCR and immunohistochemical assays, in order to unequivocally confirm or rule out
the presence of EVB19 in the thyroid gland. The present protocol must now be
validated in larger series--notably with respect to its reliability and in order 
to determine qPCR positivity thresholds for application in future large-scale
studies.

Â© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.24147 
PMID: 25754116  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
