

723. J Virol. 2015 May;89(9):4980-91. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00335-15. Epub 2015 Feb 18.

Evidence supporting a role for TopBP1 and Brd4 in the initiation but not
continuation of human papillomavirus 16 E1/E2-mediated DNA replication.

Gauson EJ(1), Donaldson MM(2), Dornan ES(2), Wang X(3), Bristol M(3), Bodily
JM(4), Morgan IM(5).

Author information: 
(1)VCU Philips Institute for Oral Health Research, Virginia Commonwealth
University School of Dentistry, Department of Oral and Craniofacial Molecular
Biology, Richmond, Virginia, USA University of Glasgow Institute of Infection,
Immunology and Inflammation, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(2)University of Glasgow Institute of Infection, Immunology and Inflammation,
Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(3)VCU Philips Institute for Oral Health Research, Virginia Commonwealth
University School of Dentistry, Department of Oral and Craniofacial Molecular
Biology, Richmond, Virginia, USA.
(4)Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center-Shreveport, Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, Shreveport, Louisiana, USA.
(5)VCU Philips Institute for Oral Health Research, Virginia Commonwealth
University School of Dentistry, Department of Oral and Craniofacial Molecular
Biology, Richmond, Virginia, USA Massey Cancer Center, Virginia Commonwealth
University, Richmond, Virginia, USA immorgan@vcu.edu.

To replicate the double-stranded human papillomavirus 16 (HPV16) DNA genome,
viral proteins E1 and E2 associate with the viral origin of replication, and E2
can also regulate transcription from adjacent promoters. E2 interacts with host
proteins in order to regulate both transcription and replication; TopBP1 and Brd4
are cellular proteins that interact with HPV16 E2. Previous work with E2 mutants 
demonstrated the Brd4 requirement for the transactivation properties of E2, while
TopBP1 is required for DNA replication induced by E2 from the viral origin of
replication in association with E1. More-recent studies have also implicated Brd4
in the regulation of DNA replication by E2 and E1. Here, we demonstrate that both
TopBP1 and Brd4 are present at the viral origin of replication and that
interaction with E2 is required for optimal initiation of DNA replication. Both
cellular proteins are present in E1-E2-containing nuclear foci, and the viral
origin of replication is required for the efficient formation of these foci.
Short hairpin RNA (shRNA) against either TopBP1 or Brd4 destroys the E1-E2
nuclear bodies but has no effect on E1-E2-mediated levels of DNA replication. An 
E2 mutation in the context of the complete HPV16 genome that compromises Brd4
interaction fails to efficiently establish episomes in primary human
keratinocytes. Overall, the results suggest that interactions between TopBP1 and 
E2 and between Brd4 and E2 are required to correctly initiate DNA replication but
are not required for continuing DNA replication, which may be mediated by
alternative processes such as rolling circle amplification and/or homologous
recombination.IMPORTANCE: Human papillomavirus 16 (HPV16) is causative in many
human cancers, including cervical and head and neck cancers, and is responsible
for the annual deaths of hundreds of thousands of people worldwide. The current
vaccine will save lives in future generations, but antivirals targeting HPV16 are
required for the alleviation of disease burden on the current, and future,
generations. Targeting viral DNA replication that is mediated by two viral
proteins, E1 and E2, in association with cellular proteins such as TopBP1 and
Brd4 would have therapeutic benefits. This report suggests a role for these
cellular proteins in the initiation of viral DNA replication by HPV16 E1-E2 but
not for continuing replication. This is important if viral replication is to be
effectively targeted; we need to understand the viral and cellular proteins
required at each phase of viral DNA replication so that it can be effectively
disrupted.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00335-15 
PMCID: PMC4403487
PMID: 25694599  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
