

724. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2018 May;102(10):4339-4343. doi:
10.1007/s00253-018-8956-y. Epub 2018 Mar 30.

Duox2-induced innate immune responses in the respiratory epithelium and
intranasal delivery of Duox2 DNA using polymer that mediates immunization.

Jeon YJ(1), Kim HJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Seoul National
University Hospital, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 103,
Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul, South Korea.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Seoul National
University Hospital, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 103,
Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul, South Korea. hyunjerry@snu.ac.kr.

Respiratory mucosa especially nasal epithelium is well known as the first-line
barrier of air-borne pathogens. High levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) are 
detected in in vitro cultured human epithelial cells and in vivo lung. With
identification of NADPH oxidase (Nox) system of respiratory epithelium, the
antimicrobial role of ROS has been studied. Duox2 is the most abundant Nox
isoform and produces the regulated amount of ROS in respiratory epithelium.
Duox2-derived ROS are involved in antiviral innate immune responses but more
studies are needed to verify the mechanism. In respiratory epithelium,
Duox2-derived ROS is critical for recognition of virus through families retinoic 
acid-inducible gene-I (RIG-I) and melanoma differentiation-associated protein 5
(MDA5) at the early stage of antiviral innate immune responses. Various secreted 
interferons (IFNs) play essential roles for antiviral host defense by downstream 
cell signaling, and transcription of IFN-stimulated genes is started to suppress 
viral replication. Type I and type III IFNs are verified more responsible for
influenza A virus (IAV) infection in respiratory epithelium and Duox2 is required
to regulate IFN-related immune responses. Transient overexpression of Duox2 using
cationic polymer polyethylenimine (PEI) induces secretion of type I and type III 
IFNs and significantly attenuated IAV replication in respiratory epithelium.
Here, we discuss Duox2-mediated antiviral innate immune responses and the role of
Duox2 as a mucosal vaccine to resist respiratory viral infection.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-018-8956-y 
PMID: 29600494  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
