

735. Br J Cancer. 2013 Mar 5;108(4):859-65. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2013.43. Epub 2013 Feb 5.

Combined treatment of the experimental human papilloma virus-16-positive cervical
and head and neck cancers with cisplatin and radioimmunotherapy targeting viral
E6 oncoprotein.

Harris M(1), Wang XG, Jiang Z, Phaeton R, Koba W, Goldberg GL, Casadevall A,
Dadachova E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1695A
Eastchester Road, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

BACKGROUND: Human papilloma virus (HPV) is implicated in >99% of cervical cancers
and ∼40% of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). We previously targeted
E6 oncogene with (188)Rhenium-labelled monoclonal antibody (mAb) C1P5 to HPV16 E6
in cervical cancer and HNSCC. Intranuclear E6 can be accessed by mAbs in
non-viable cells with leaky membranes. As radioimmunotherapy (RIT) efficacy
depends on the availability of target protein-we hypothesised that pretreatment
with cisplatin will kill some tumour cells and increase E6 availability for RIT.
METHODS: Mice with subcutaneous HPV16+ cervical (CasKi) and HNSCC (2A3) tumours
were pretreated with 0-7.5 mg kg(-1) per day cisplatin for 3 days followed by
(188)Re-C1P5 and biodistribution was performed 24 h later. For RIT, the animals
were treated with: 5 mg kg(-1) per day cisplatin for 3 days; or 5 mg kg(-1) per
day cisplatin for 3 days followed 200 or 400μCi (188)Re-C1P5 mAb; or 200 or
400μCi (188)Re-C1P5 mAb; or left untreated, and observed for tumour growth for 24
days.
RESULTS: Pretreatment with cisplatin increased the uptake of (188)Re-C1P5 in the 
tumours 2.5 to 3.5-fold and caused significant retardation in tumour growth for
CasKi and 2A3 tumours in both RIT alone and cisplatin, and RIT groups in
comparison with the untreated control and cisplatin alone groups (P<0.05). The
combined treatment was more effective than either modality alone (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: Our study demonstrates that preceding RIT targeting E6 oncogene with 
chemotherapy is effective in suppressing tumour growth in mouse models of HPV16+ 
cancers.

DOI: 10.1038/bjc.2013.43 
PMCID: PMC3590678
PMID: 23385729  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
