

736. Oral Oncol. 2014 Apr;50(4):311-8. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2014.01.001. Epub
2014 Jan 24.

Adjuvant chemoradiation therapy with high-dose versus weekly cisplatin for
resected, locally-advanced HPV/p16-positive and negative head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma.

Geiger JL(1), Lazim AF(2), Walsh FJ(3), Foote RL(4), Moore EJ(5), Okuno SH(6),
Olsen KD(5), Kasperbauer JL(5), Price DL(5), Garces YI(4), Ma DJ(4),
Neben-Wittich MA(4), Molina JR(6), Garcia JJ(3), Price KA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States.
(2)Department of Pathology, Al Jumhori Teaching Hospital, Mosul, Iraq.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN,
United States.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States.
(5)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
MN, United States.
(6)Division of Medical Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States.
(7)Division of Medical Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States.
Electronic address: price.katharine@mayo.edu.

OBJECTIVES: Standard treatment for patients with poor-risk, resected head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is adjuvant radiation therapy combined with 
high-dose cisplatin. Many patients are treated with weekly cisplatin; it is not
known whether weekly and high-dose cisplatin are equivalent. This study compares 
the outcomes of patients with locally-advanced HPV-negative HNSCC and
HPV/p16-positive oropharynx HNSCC treated with adjuvant chemoradiation therapy
with either high-dose or weekly cisplatin.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Retrospective review of patients with Stage III/IV HNSCC
who had surgery followed by adjuvant chemoradiation therapy at Mayo Clinic,
Rochester. HPV and/or p16 status was available for all oropharynx patients.
RESULTS: 104 Patients (51 high-dose, 53 weekly) were analyzed. The 3-year overall
survival was 84% and 75% for patients who received high dose and weekly
cisplatin, respectively (p=0.30). The 3-year recurrence free survival was 71% and
74% in the high dose and weekly cisplatin group, respectively (p=0.95). Patients 
with HPV/p16-positive oropharynx cancer who received adjuvant chemoradiation
therapy with high-dose and weekly cisplatin had three-year overall survival rates
of 91% and 86% (p=0.56), and 3-year recurrence free survival of 84% and 82%
(p=0.93). Extracapsular extension did not affect prognosis in either group.
CONCLUSIONS: No significant survival difference was seen between patients with
locally advanced HNSCC treated with adjuvant chemoradiation therapy with
high-dose or weekly cisplatin, although there was a trend for improved survival
with high-dose cisplatin. Weekly cisplatin in the adjuvant setting may be a
better treatment for patients with HPV-positive oropharynx cancer to preserve
survival and minimize toxicity.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2014.01.001 
PMID: 24467937  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
