

740. Med Microbiol Immunol. 2017 Apr;206(2):93-103. doi: 10.1007/s00430-016-0486-6.
Epub 2016 Nov 10.

Human polyomavirus and human papillomavirus prevalence and viral load in
non-malignant tonsillar tissue and tonsillar carcinoma.

Herberhold S(1)(2), Hellmich M(3), Panning M(4), Bartok E(5), Silling S(6), Akgül
B(7), Wieland U(6).

Author information: 
(1)ENT Department, Head and Neck Surgery, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(2)ENT Department, Johanniter-Kliniken Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(3)Institute of Medical Statistics, Informatics and Epidemiology, University of
Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(4)Institute for Virology, Medical Center - University of Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany.
(5)Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology, University of Bonn,
Bonn, Germany.
(6)Institute of Virology, National Reference Center for Papilloma- and
Polyomaviruses, University of Cologne, Fürst-Pückler-Str. 56, 50935, Cologne,
Germany.
(7)Institute of Virology, National Reference Center for Papilloma- and
Polyomaviruses, University of Cologne, Fürst-Pückler-Str. 56, 50935, Cologne,
Germany. baki.akguel@uk-koeln.de.

Human papillomaviruses (HPVs) are an acknowledged cause of a subset of
oropharyngeal cancers, especially of tonsillar cancer. Similar to HPV, some human
polyomaviruses (HPyVs), such as Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCPyV), have an
oncogenic potential. Recently, several novel HPyVs have been discovered. The aim 
of our study was to determine viral DNA prevalence and viral DNA load of 13
different HPyVs in benign and malignant tonsillar tissue and to compare the data 
with those found for HPV. A total of 78 biopsies of palatine tonsils with a
histologic diagnosis of non-malignant disease (chronic tonsillitis, tonsillar
hyperplasia, n = 40) or tonsillar squamous cell carcinoma (n = 38) were included 
in the study. HPyV DNA prevalence and viral load were determined by
virus-specific quantitative real-time PCRs. JCPyV (1/40, 2.5%) and WUPyV (3/40,
7.5%) were only found in non-malignant tonsillar tissue. HPyV7 and HPyV10 were
only detected in one (2.6%) and seven (18.4%) of the 38 cancer biopsies,
respectively. Both MCPyV (8/38, 21.1 vs. 4/40, 10.0%) and HPyV6 (2/38, 5.3 vs.
1/40, 2.5%) were found more frequently in cancer samples than in non-malignant
tissue, but the differences were not significant. BKPyV, KIPyV, TSPyV, HPyV9,
STLPyV, HPyV12 and NJPyV were not discovered in any of the samples. HPyV loads
found in HPyV DNA-positive biopsies were very low with no difference between
non-malignant and malignant samples (median load <0.0001 HPyV DNA copies per
beta-globin gene copy, respectively). In contrast to HPyV, high-risk HPV types
(HPV16/HPV18) were found significantly more frequently in tonsillar cancers than 
in non-malignant tonsillar tissue (17/38, 44.7 vs. 2/40, 5.0%, p < 0.001).
Furthermore, high-risk HPV DNA loads were significantly higher in the cancer
compared to the non-malignant samples (median load 11.861 vs. 7 × 10-6 HPV DNA
copies per beta-globin gene copy, p = 0.012). While both HPV and HPyV may persist
in tonsillar tissue, our data on HPyV DNA prevalence and load do not support a
role of HPyV in tonsillar carcinogenesis, neither alone nor as co-infecting
agents of HPV.

DOI: 10.1007/s00430-016-0486-6 
PMID: 27832373  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
