

741. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2013 Feb;270(2):719-25. doi:
10.1007/s00405-012-2075-7. Epub 2012 Jun 15.

Is human papillomavirus involved in laryngeal neuroendocrine carcinoma?

Halmos GB(1), van der Laan TP, van Hemel BM, Dikkers FG, Slagter-Menkema L, van
der Laan BF, Schuuring E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Medical Center
Groningen, University of Groningen, P.O. Box 30.001, 9700 RB Groningen, The
Netherlands. g.b.halmos@umcg.nl

The purpose of this study was to detect human papillomavirus (HPV) infection in
laryngeal neuroendocrine carcinoma (LNEC) and to explore the possible
relationship between HPV-induced malignant transformation and prognosis in LNEC. 
Ten cases of LNEC from a tertiary referral hospital were retrospectively
analyzed. Clinical data were subtracted from patients' files. Pretreatment biopsy
material was tested for the presence of HPV6, 11, 16, and 18 using a PCR-based
detection method. Immunohistochemical staining was performed for Ki-67,
p16(INK4A), and p53 expression. All cases were negative for the low-risk HPV
types HPV6 and HPV11 that are associated with laryngeal papillomatosis. High-risk
HPV was detected in two cases; an atypical carcinoid was positive for HPV16 and a
large-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma for HPV18. Both HPV-positive tumors had a
high Ki-67 labeling index. Two of the four cases with a good response to therapy 
were hrHPV-positive (both HPV DNA positive) compared with none of the five poor
responders. Our findings show that HPV may play a role in the pathogenesis of
LNEC. The relationship between HPV, improved prognosis and good response to
therapy for squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck may also be true for a
subset of LNEC.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-012-2075-7 
PMCID: PMC3560955
PMID: 22699626  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
