

743. Head Neck Oncol. 2009 Oct 14;1:36. doi: 10.1186/1758-3284-1-36.

HPV & head and neck cancer: a descriptive update.

Goon PK(1), Stanley MA, Ebmeyer J, Steinsträsser L, Upile T, Jerjes W,
Bernal-Sprekelsen M, Görner M, Sudhoff HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
pg336@cam.ac.uk

The incidence of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) has been gradually
increasing over the last three decades. Recent data have now attributed a viral
aetiology to a subset of head and neck cancers. Several studies indicate that
oral human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is likely to be sexually acquired. The 
dominance of HPV 16 in HPV+ HNSCC is even greater than that seen in cervical
carcinoma of total worldwide cases. Strong evidence suggests that HPV+ status is 
an important prognostic factor associated with a favourable outcome in head and
neck cancers. Approximately 30 to 40% of HNSCC patients with present with early
stage I/II disease. These patients are treated with curative intent using single 
modality treatments either radiation or surgery alone. A non-operative approach
is favored for patients in which surgery followed by either radiation alone or
radiochemotherapy may lead to severe functional impairment. Cetuximab, a
humanized mouse anti-EGFR IgG1 monoclonal antibody, improved locoregional control
and overall survival in combination with radiotherapy in locally advanced tumours
but at the cost of some increased cardiac morbidity and mortality. Finally, the
improved prognosis and treatment responses to chemotherapy and radiotherapy by
HPV+ tumours may suggest that HPV status detection is required to better plan and
individualize patient treatment regimes.

DOI: 10.1186/1758-3284-1-36 
PMCID: PMC2770444
PMID: 19828033  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
