

745. Cancer Res. 2012 Mar 1;72(5):1280-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-2833. Epub
2012 Jan 11.

Pocket proteins suppress head and neck cancer.

Shin MK(1), Pitot HC, Lambert PF.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) is a common cancer in humans long 
known to be caused by tobacco and alcohol use, but now an increasing percentage
of HNSCC is recognized to be caused by the same human papillomaviruses (HPV) that
cause cervical and other anogenital cancers. HPV-positive HNSCCs differ
remarkably from HPV-negative HNSCCs in their clinical response and molecular
properties. From studies in mice, we know that E7 is the dominant HPV oncoprotein
in head and neck cancer. E7 is best known for its ability to inactivate pRb, the 
product of the retinoblastoma tumor susceptibility gene. However, loss of pRb
function does not fully account for potency of E7 in causing head and neck
cancer. In this study, we characterized the cancer susceptibility of mice
deficient in the expression of pRb and either of two related "pocket" proteins,
p107 and p130, that are also inactivated by E7. pRb/p107-deficient mice developed
head and neck cancer as frequently as do HPV-16 E7 transgenic mice. The head and 
neck epithelia of the pRb/p107-deficient mice also displayed the same acute
phenotypes and biomarker readouts as observed in the epithelia of E7 transgenic
mice. Mice deficient for pRb and p130 in their head and neck epithelia showed
intermediate acute and tumor phenotypes. We conclude that pRb and p107 act
together to efficiently suppress head and neck cancer and are, therefore, highly 
relevant targets of HPV-16 E7 in its contribution to HPV-positive HNSCC.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-2833 
PMCID: PMC3293996
PMID: 22237625  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
