

747. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2014 Mar;44(3):232-40. doi: 10.1093/jjco/hyt223. Epub 2014 Jan 
26.

Prognostic impact of p16 and p53 expression in oropharyngeal squamous cell
carcinomas.

Shinohara S(1), Kikuchi M, Tona R, Kanazawa Y, Kishimoto I, Harada H, Imai Y,
Usami Y.

Author information: 
(1)*Minatojima-minamimachi 2-1-1, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0047, Japan.
sinosino@kcho.jp.

BACKGROUNDS: A p16 protein is known to be overexpressed in human
papillomavirus-positive head and neck squamous cell carcinoma specimens. p53 is a
tumor suppressor protein detectable by immunohistochemistry in
carcinogen-associated head and neck squamous cell carcinoma as a result of gene
mutations. The purpose of this study is to investigate the prognostic impact of
p16 and p53 expression in oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas.
METHODS: We retrospectively examined the relationship between prognosis, and p16 
and p53 expression levels of oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma specimens in
53 patients using immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Overall, 55% of patients were p16 positive and 45% p16 negative, while
28% were p53 positive and 72% p53 negative. The p16 status showed an inverse
relationship with the p53 status. A survival analysis by p16 status, p53 status, 
Union for International Cancer Control stage and main treatment modality
demonstrated that only p16 status was related to better prognosis in terms of
overall survival and disease-specific survival (3-year overall survival, 87 vs.
62%, P = 0.02; 3-year disease-specific survival, 90 vs. 62%, P = 0.02). To
evaluate the practical prognostic factors in oropharyngeal squamous cell
carcinoma patients, we classified patients as either p16-positive or p53-negative
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas, representing human papillomavirus-related
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma with wild-type p53 or the remaining
patients with p16-negative or p53-positive OPSCCs, respectively. The former group
showed survival advantages in terms of overall survival and disease-specific
survival by log-tank test compared with the latter group (3-year overall
survival, 96 vs. 58%, P = 0.005; 3-year disease-specific survival, 96 vs. 63%, P 
= 0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: A group of patients who were p16 positive/p53 negative had better
prognoses in terms of overall survival and disease-specific survival than that
who were p16-positive alone.

DOI: 10.1093/jjco/hyt223 
PMID: 24470584  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
