

752. Acta Clin Croat. 2017 Sep;56(3):425-436. doi: 10.20471/acc.2017.56.03.09.

Acoustic Reflex and House-Brackmann Rating Scale as Prognostic Indicators of
Peripheral Facial Palsy in Neuroborreliosis.

Sekelj A(1), Đanić D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of ENT and Head and Neck Surgery, Dr Josip Benčević General County 
Hospital, Slavonski Brod, Croatia.

Lyme borreliosis is a vector-borne infectious disease characterized by three
disease stages. In the areas endemic for borreliosis, every acute facial palsy
indicates serologic testing and implies specific approach to the disease. Th e
aim of the study was to identify and confirm the value of acoustic refl ex and
House-Brackman (HB) grading scale as prognostic indicators of facial palsy in
neuroborreliosis. Th e study included 176 patients with acute facial palsy
divided into three groups based on serologic testing: borreliosis, Bell's palsy, 
and facial palsy caused by herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1). Study patients
underwent baseline audiometry with tympanometry and acoustic reflex, whereas
current state of facial palsy was assessed by the HB scale. Subsequently, the
same tests were obtained on three occasions, i.e. in week 3, 6 and 12 of
presentation. Th e patients diagnosed with borreliosis, Bell's palsy and HSV-1
differed according to the time to acoustic refl ex recovery, which took longest
time in patients with borreliosis. Th ese patients had the highest percentage of 
suprastapedial lesions at all time points and recovery was achieved later as
compared with the other two diagnoses. Th e mean score on the HB scale declined
with time, also at a slower rate in borreliosis patients. Th e prognosis of
acoustic refl ex and facial palsy recovery according to HB scale was not
associated with the length of elapsed time. The results obtained in the present
study strongly confirmed the role of acoustic reflex and HB grading scale as
prognostic indicators of facial palsy in neuroborreliosis.

DOI: 10.20471/acc.2017.56.03.09 
PMID: 29479908  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
