

757. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2015 Jan;12(1):11-26. doi: 10.1038/nrclinonc.2014.192. Epub
2014 Nov 18.

Emerging biomarkers in head and neck cancer in the era of genomics.

Kang H(1), Kiess A(2), Chung CH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Johns
Hopkins Medical Institutions, 1650 Orleans Street, CRB-1 Room 344, Baltimore, MD 
21287-0013, USA.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, 1650 Orleans Street, CRB-1 Room 344,
Baltimore, MD 21287-0013, USA.
(3)1] Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Johns 
Hopkins Medical Institutions, 1650 Orleans Street, CRB-1 Room 344, Baltimore, MD 
21287-0013, USA. [2] Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, 1650
Orleans Street, CRB-1 Room 344, Baltimore, MD 21287-0013, USA.

Head and neck cancer (HNC) broadly includes carcinomas arising from the mucosal
epithelia of the head and neck region as well as various cell types of salivary
glands and the thyroid. As reflected by the multiple sites and histologies of
HNC, the molecular characteristics and clinical outcomes of this disease vary
widely. In this Review, we focus on established and emerging biomarkers that are 
most relevant to nasopharyngeal carcinoma and head and neck squamous-cell
carcinoma (HNSCC), which includes primary sites in the oral cavity, oropharynx,
hypopharynx and larynx. Applications and limitations of currently established
biomarkers are discussed along with examples of successful biomarker development.
For emerging biomarkers, preclinical or retrospective data are also described in 
the context of recently completed comprehensive molecular analyses of HNSCC,
which provide a broad genetic landscape and molecular classification beyond
histology and clinical characteristics. We will highlight the ongoing effort that
will see a shift from prognostic to predictive biomarker development in HNC with 
the goal of delivering individualized cancer therapy.

DOI: 10.1038/nrclinonc.2014.192 
PMID: 25403939  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
