

76. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2018 May 26;19(5):1325-1330.

Detection of Human Papilloma Virus and Risk Factors among Patients with Head and 
Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma Attending a Tertiary Referral Centre in South India

Bandhary SK(1), Shetty V, Saldanha M, Gatti P, Devegowda D, R PS, Shetty AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, K.S.Hegde Medical
Academy, NITTE University-575018 Mangalore, Karnataka, India. Email:
saldanhamarina@gmail.com

Background: Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinomas (HNSCC) is the sixth most
common cancer globally. In India, on an average 25-30% of all cancer cases affect
the head and neck. The etiological factors associated with HNSCC are tobacco,
alcohol and environmental carcinogens. However there are few cases, where there
are no obvious risk factors involved. In western counties, there are many reports
of human papilloma virus (HPV) association with HNSCC. Hence, we conducted a
study to determine the role of HPV infection and risk factors among patients with
HNSCC. Materials and Methods: A prospective, cross-sectional study was conducted 
in a tertiary referral centre from January 2014 to March 2016. 88 patients were
enrolled in the study. Socio- demographic, behavioural data, site and subsite
involvement, histopathology, staging and treatment were documented. Polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) was performed to detect the presence of HPV DNA using
consensus primers MY 09/11 and GP5+/GP6+ and further the samples were subjected
to PCR for detecting HPV type 16 and 18. Results: The study included 88
participants with HNSCC. 57 had oral and oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma,
11 with laryngeal malignancy and 20 involving hypopharynx. Among the participants
buccal mucosa (n=22) was the most common subsite involved, majority (50%) had
moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma and 53.4% presented in stage
IV. 2 (2.6%) cases were positive for HPV consensus and both were positive for HPV
16, one case each in larynx and hypopharynx. There was statistical significance
in the association between betel nut chewing, cigarette smoking and alcohol
intake as risk factors in the carcinogenesis of HNSCC. Conclusion: In our setting
in South India, HPV does not play a major role in the carcinogenesis of HNSCC but
betel nut chewing, tobacco exposure and alcohol consumption remain major risk
factors for HNSCC.

Creative Commons Attribution License

DOI: 10.22034/APJCP.2018.19.5.1325 
PMCID: PMC6031850
PMID: 29802694  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
