

768. Rev Med Chir Soc Med Nat Iasi. 2015 Apr-Jun;119(2):502-9.

DETECTION OF HUMAN PAPILLOMA VIRUS IN HEAD AND NECK SQUAMOUS CELL CARCINOMAS: A
LITERATURE REVIEW.

Jelihovschi I, Bidescu AC, Tucaliuc SE, Iancu LS.

Human papilloma viruses (HPV) are the most common sexually transmitted viruses.
There is mounting evidence that incriminates HPV as a risk factor for malignant
transformation of oropharyngeal epithelium. In 2011 the International Research
Agency of Cancer and National Cancer Institute (USA) declared HPV-16 as an
independent risk factor for oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC).
Leaders in the field of HPV research admit that this subtype of head and neck
cancer is a sexually transmitted entity and its global incidence is on the rise. 
In the 1980s, clinicians observed a new group of patients with head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) independent of tobacco smoking or alcohol use.
The new HNSCC patient is a middle-aged man, non-smoker, non-drinker with higher
social status and the suspected risk factors for HNSCC being related to sexual
practices (oral sex, multiple sexual partners, unprotected sex and drug use).
Routine HPV testing of HNSCC patients is seriously considered as HPV-positive
oropharyngeal cancers comprise a distinct molecular, clinical and pathologic
entity that has a markedly better prognosis than HPV-negative oropharyngeal
cancers. The current treatment protocols for OPSCC include radiation,
chemotherapy and surgery alone or in combination, involving high toxicity levels.
Future therapeutic concepts for OPSCC may be personalized in relation to
HPV-status to avoid unnecessary toxicity. The current review summarizes the
contemporary trends in the diagnosis of HPV-related head and neck cancers,
presenting the advantages and disadvantages of the main methods.


PMID: 26204659  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
