
Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


78. Oral Oncol. 2014 May;50(5):370-9. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2013.11.004. Epub
2013 Dec 9.

Role of human papillomavirus in non-oropharyngeal head and neck cancers.

Combes JD(1), Franceschi S(2).

Author information: 
(1)International Agency for Research on Cancer, 150 cours Albert Thomas, 69372
Lyon cedex 08, France. Electronic address: CombesJD@fellows.iarc.fr.
(2)International Agency for Research on Cancer, 150 cours Albert Thomas, 69372
Lyon cedex 08, France. Electronic address: FranceschiS@iarc.fr.

Accurate estimates of the fraction of head and neck cancer (HNC) attributable to 
human papillomavirus (HPV) infection are essential to predict the effectiveness
of interventions based on vaccination against HPV or HPV-testing. In addition, if
supported by currently on-going clinical trials, attribution of a HNC to HPV may 
allow better and less toxic treatments. Here we focused on studies in which the
prevalence of molecular and serological HPV markers was similarly assessed in
oropharyngeal and non-oropharyngeal HNC. Large data on HPV DNA detection by PCR
and p16 expression in HNC biopsies suggests that the probability of a cancer of
the oral cavity, larynx, and hypopharynx being attributable to HPV is at least
5-fold lower than that for oropharyngeal cancer. Seropositivity for HPV16 E6 or
E7 shows larger differences across sites, but findings vary between studies.
Because HPV DNA and p16 detection lack specificity, and E6 and E7 antibody
detection lacks sensitivity, these tests are not totally satisfactory. Limited
data on in situ hybridization or HPV E6/E7 mRNA, mainly from the United States,
suggests that HPV-attributable HNC is rare in the oral cavity (∼3%), larynx
(∼7%), and hypopharynx (∼0%). Data on HPV in other rarer HNCs are extremely
limited and essentially negative. Available data do not allow the establishment
of the way HPV infection and tobacco may interact in non-oropharyngeal HNC. The
exclusion of oropharynx as a site of tumor origin and the identification of
robust fingerprints of HPV-driven carcinogenesis are the priorities to improve
the estimate of HPV-attributable non-oropharyngeal HNC.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2013.11.004 
PMID: 24331868  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
