

781. Nutr Cancer. 2011;63(5):734-42. doi: 10.1080/01635581.2011.570894. Epub 2011 Jun 
11.

Higher micronutrient intake is associated with human papillomavirus-positive head
and neck cancer: a case-only analysis.

Arthur AE(1), Duffy SA, Sanchez GI, Gruber SB, Terrell JE, Hebert JR, Light E,
Bradford CR, D'Silva NJ, Carey TE, Wolf GT, Peterson KE, Rozek LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, University of Michigan School of 
Public Health, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-2029, USA.

No studies have investigated dietary differences between head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma (HNSCC) patients with human papillomavirus (HPV)-positive tumors
and patients with HPV-negative tumors. This study was designed to investigate the
relationship between diet and HPV status in HNSCC patients. Cases of HNSCC were
recruited from 2 clinical centers participating in the University of Michigan
Head and Neck Specialized Program of Research Excellence (SPORE). HPV tissue
genotyping was performed, and epidemiological and dietary data collected.
Multivariable logistic regression tested whether pretreatment consumption of 12
selected micronutrients was significantly associated with HPV-positive status in 
143 patients newly diagnosed with cancer of the oral cavity or pharynx. After
controlling for age, sex, body mass index, tumor site, cancer stage, problem
drinking, smoking, and energy intake, significant and positive associations were 
observed between vitamin A, vitamin E, iron, Î²-carotene, and folate intake and
HPV-positive status (P(trend) < 0.05), suggesting that diet may be a factor in
the improved prognosis documented in those with HPV-positive HNSCC. Dietary
differences by HPV status should be considered in prognostic studies to better
understand the influence of diet on HNSCC survival.

DOI: 10.1080/01635581.2011.570894 
PMCID: PMC3391594
PMID: 21667401  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
