

787. Pathol Res Pract. 2010 Nov 15;206(11):768-71. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2010.07.011.
Epub 2010 Sep 17.

Core classification of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas: correlations
between morphology, DNA ploidy and HPV infection.

Kotb WF(1), Blind C, Friedrich KH, Schewe C, Zhang ZG, Zheng JM, Deutschman N,
Pacyna-Gengelbach M, Dietel M, Petersen I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Charité Campus Mitte, Charitéplatz 1, 10117 Berlin,
Germany.

AIMS: The study intended to reveal whether HPV infection is reflected by nuclear 
morphology and DNA cytometry parameters in head and neck squamous cell carcinomas
(HNSCC).
METHODS: In total, 39 HNSCC were selected for reanalysis by histomorphology
applying the core classification, DNA cytometry and HPV detection. For the core
classification, HE sections were assessed by a score system to evaluate the
nuclear size, the mitosis size, their variabilities and the presence of tripolar 
or tetrapolar mitoses. HPV was analyzed by consensus PCR followed by a
hybridization method for virus typing. Static DNA cytometry was applied on single
cell suspension focusing particularly on the parameters DNA modal value, DNA
index peak, DNA index mean, 2c deviation index and 5c exceeding rate. Statistical
analysis was done by T-test or Fisher's exact test.
RESULTS: The analysis revealed that HPV positive HNSCC had significantly smaller 
nuclei than HPV negative cases. Increasing values of the nuclear size and mitosis
size were significantly associated with higher indices of the DNA cytometry
analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: The study confirms that the core classification can provide
information on the ploidy of HNSCC and that HPV positive tumors represent a
distinct morphological and genetic carcinoma subtype.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prp.2010.07.011 
PMID: 20850227  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
