

795. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 28;10(10):e0141722. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0141722.
eCollection 2015.

Human Papillomavirus (HPV) Prevalence in Nasal and Antrochoanal Polyps and
Association with Clinical Data.

Knör M(1), Tziridis K(1), Agaimy A(2), Zenk J(1), Wendler O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Otorhinolaryngology, ENT-Hospital, Head and Neck Surgery,
Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Department of Pathology, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg
(FAU), Erlangen, Germany.

OBJECTIVES: The pathogenesis of sinonasal polyposis remains unclear, in spite of 
several investigative approaches. Antrochoanal polyps, a subgroup of sinonasal
polyposis along with allergic- and chronic-inflammatory nasal polyps, mostly
originate from the maxillary sinus and develop as a unilateral, pedunculated mass
towards the nasopharynx. The human papillomavirus (HPV) is discussed as a
possible causative and influencing factor in development and progression of
sinonasal polyposis. This study aims to elucidate HPV frequency in nasal polyps
and antrochoanal polyps.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Genomic DNA from 257 tissue specimens (166 nasal polyps,
39 antrochoanal polyps and 52 nasal turbinates) was subjected to three different 
established HPV- polymerase chain reaction assays, testing for 37 low- and
high-risk HPV. In addition, immunohistochemical analyses for HPV16 were carried
out, as well as immunohistochemistry and western blots of p16, a biomarker for
HPV induced cancer.
RESULTS: HPV-DNA was detected in 53.8% of antrochoanal polyps, 15.1% of nasal
polyps, and 5.8% of nasal turbinates. HPV16 was the predominant type with a
detection rate of 76% in nasal polyps and 62% in antrochoanal polyps.
Immunohistochemically, HPV positive tissues stained positive for HPV16 antigens
and p16 in epithelial cell layers. No significant p16 overexpression was
traceable in antrochoanal polyps, nasal polyps and nasal turbinates by western
blot. There was no correlation of HPV-status with sex, age, smoking, alcohol
consumption or allergic background.
CONCLUSION: The present study shows a significant frequency of high-risk type
HPV16 in antrochoanal polyps. Absence of oncogenic transformation or correlation 
of the HPV-status with clinical data suggests a latent superinfection, possibly
because of anatomical proximity to the oropharynx.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0141722 
PMCID: PMC4624970
PMID: 26509801  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
