

80. PLoS One. 2017 Mar 17;12(3):e0174188. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0174188.
eCollection 2017.

Respiratory DNA viruses are undetectable in nasopharyngeal secretions from
adenotonsillectomized children.

Martins RB(1), Rocha LP(2), Prates MM(2), Gagliardi TB(1), Biasoli B(1), Leite
MJ(2), Buzatto G(2), Hyppolito MA(2), Aragon DC(3), Tamashiro E(2), Valera FC(2),
Arruda E(1), Anselmo-Lima WT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cell Biology, School of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto of
University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil.
(2)Ophthalmology, Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, School of
Medicine of Ribeirão Preto of University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto of University
of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil.

Respiratory viruses are frequently detected in association with chronic tonsillar
hypertrophy in the absence of symptoms of acute respiratory infection (ARI). The 
present analysis was done in follow-up to a previous clinical study done by this 
same group. Nasopharyngeal washes (NPWs) were obtained from 83 of 120 individuals
at variable times post adenotonsillectomy, in the absence of ARI symptoms. A look
back at virus detection results in NPWs from the same 83 individuals at the time 
of tonsillectomy revealed that 73.5% (61/83) were positive for one or more
viruses. The overall frequency of respiratory virus detection in
post-tonsillectomy NPWs was 58.8%. Rhinovirus (RV) was the agent most frequently 
detected, in 38 of 83 subjects (45.8%), followed by enterovirus in 7 (8.4%),
human metapneumovirus in 6 (7.2%), human respiratory syncytial virus in 3 (3.6%) 
and human coronavirus in 1 (1.2%). Remarkably, there was no detection of
adenovirus (HAdV) or human bocavirus (HBoV) in asymptomatic individuals in
follow-up of adenotonsillectomy. In keeping with persistence of respiratory DNA
viruses in human tonsils, tonsillectomy significantly reduces asymptomatic
shedding of HAdV and HBoV in NPWs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0174188 
PMCID: PMC5357011
PMID: 28306724  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
