

806. Virol J. 2012 Feb 15;9:38. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-9-38.

Epidemics of viral meningitis caused by echovirus 6 and 30 in Korea in 2008.

Kim HJ(1), Kang B, Hwang S, Hong J, Kim K, Cheon DS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Enteric and Hepatitis Viruses, Center for Infectious Diseases,
National Institute of Health, Korea Center for Disease Control and Prevention,
South Korea.

BACKGROUND: Enteroviruses (EVs) are the leading cause of aseptic meningitis,
which is the most frequent central nervous system infection worldwide. We aimed
to characterize the EVs involved in an aseptic meningitis outbreak in Korea in
2008. In Korea, Echovirus type 30 (E30) and E6 have been associated with
outbreaks and frequent meningitis.
METHODS: During 2008, through nationwide surveillance, we collected specimens
from 758 patients with aseptic meningitis-related clinical manifestations. The
detection of EVs from specimens was subjected to a diagnostic real-time RT-PCR in
the 5' NCR. A semi-nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to amplify sequences
from the VP1 region and sequence comparison with reference strains registered in 
Genbank was performed for the genotype determination.
RESULTS: Most patients (98%) in this outbreak were children < 15 years of age.
The temporal distribution of the E6 and E30 epidemics showed an obvious seasonal 
pattern during the short period from June to July. A large majority of the
EV-positive patients experienced fever, headache, vomiting, and neck stiffness.
Some patients also showed cold symptoms, sore throat, altered mental status, and 
seizures. We did not observe a higher fatality rate in children with E6 or E30
infection. Most of the patients recovered uneventfully. In most cases, the
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) profile was studied, and generally showed a higher than
normal white blood cell count (â‰¥ 5/mm(3)). We detected EVs from 513 patients
(67.68%) and identified the EV genotype in 287 patients. E30 (n = 155, 50.4%) and
E6 (n = 95, 33.1%) were the predominant genotypes. E9, E1, E7, E16,
coxsackievirus A3, 4, 6, coxsackievirus B1, 3, and 10 were also identified.
According to phylogenetic analysis, E30 belonged to subgroup 4b, and E6, to the
C4 subgroup.
CONCLUSIONS: Conclusively, aseptic meningitis was the most common manifestation
in children with either echovirus 30 or 6 infection. Identification of E6 and E30
as the prominent EVs in the 2008 outbreak in South Korea shows the potential of
EVs to cause a serious disease in an unpredictable (fashion. Our findings provide
new) insights into the clinical and virological features of the aseptic
meningitis outbreak caused by E30 and E6.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-9-38 
PMCID: PMC3298778
PMID: 22336050  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
