

807. Mod Pathol. 2009 Mar;22(3):366-72. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2008.180. Epub 2008 Oct
31.

Low prevalence of human papillomavirus in squamous-cell carcinoma limited to oral
cavity proper.

Scapoli L(1), Palmieri A, Rubini C, Martinelli M, Spinelli G, Ionna F, Carinci F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology, Embryology and Applied Biology, Centre of Molecular
Genetics, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. luca.scapoli2@unibo.it

Several investigations have reported that the human papillomavirus may play a
role in head and neck squamous-cell carcinoma development and may have a
prognostic impact. However, inconsistent results regarding human papillomavirus
prevalence have been obtained so far. Variables which may account for these
discrepancies may be related to site of the samples' origin, detection methods
and sample size. The aim of this study is to evaluate the presence of high-risk
type human papillomavirus in a large, well defined sample of squamous-cell
carcinoma limited to the oral cavity in its strictest definition-ie with no
pharynx or larynx cancers included-by means of quantitative real-time polymerase 
chain reaction, a method which ensures high sensitivity and offers the
opportunity to exclude false-positive results. Data were obtained from 314
squamous-cell carcinoma limited to oral cavity proper, indicated that the
prevalence of high-risk human papillomavirus was as low as 2% (CI 0.6-3). Matched
pairs case-control analysis indicated that the prevalence among controls did not 
significantly differ with respect to cases and thus did not support a major role 
for the human papillomavirus in the etiology of squamous-cell carcinoma of the
oral cavity.

DOI: 10.1038/modpathol.2008.180 
PMID: 18978731  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
