

811. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2014 Dec;271(12):3255-62. doi:
10.1007/s00405-014-3143-y. Epub 2014 Jun 26.

Human papilloma virus vaccination in patients with an aggressive course of
recurrent respiratory papillomatosis.

Hočevar-Boltežar I(1), Matičič M, Sereg-Bahar M, Gale N, Poljak M, Kocjan B,
Zargi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, University
Medical Center Ljubljana, Zaloška 2, 1000, Ljubljana, Slovenia,
irena.hocevar@kclj.si.

In the case of an aggressive course of recurrent respiratory papillomatosis
(RRP), adjuvant therapy can be used besides surgery. The aim of the study was to 
investigate the influence of vaccination with a quadrivalent vaccine against
human papilloma viruses (HPV) types 6, 11, 16 and 18 on the course of RRP. Eleven
subjects aged 13-46 years with a rapid growth of laryngeal papillomas were
included in the study. They were vaccinated with three doses of the quadrivalent 
prophylactic HPV vaccine (Silgard(®), MSD) and followed up for 12-52 months. The 
intervals between the successive surgical procedures, the extension of the
disease (Derkay score) at each surgery, and the number of surgical procedures per
year before vaccination and after its completion were compared. The mean interval
between the surgical procedures was 271.2 days before the vaccination and 537.4
days after it (p = 0.034). The mean number of surgeries per year was 2.16 before 
the vaccination and 0.93 after it (p = 0.022). The Derkay score did not change
significantly after vaccination. Complete remission of the disease was observed
in one patient, partial response to the vaccination was observed in seven
patients and no response was observed in three patients. In conclusion,
vaccination with the quadrivalent HPV vaccine can favorably influence the course 
of RRP in patients with the rapid growth of the papillomas. It significantly
prolongs the intervals between the surgical procedures and reduces the number of 
procedures needed in the majority of patients. The present investigation can
serve as a pilot study for further research. For a final conclusion a longer
follow-up and studies on more patients are necessary.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-014-3143-y 
PMID: 24964770  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
