

813. Cancer Med. 2014 Apr;3(2):376-84. doi: 10.1002/cam4.199. Epub 2014 Feb 10.

Human papillomavirus and p53 expression in cancer of unknown primary in the head 
and neck region in relation to clinical outcome.

Sivars L(1), Näsman A, Tertipis N, Vlastos A, Ramqvist T, Dalianis T,
Munck-Wikland E, Nordemar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

Patients with cancer of unknown primary (CUP) in the head neck region are
generally treated with neck dissection followed by radiotherapy at times combined
with chemotherapy, a treatment associated with considerable side effects. Some of
these tumors may originate as human papillomavirus (HPV)-positive oropharyngeal
squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC), with better clinical outcome than head neck
squamous cell cancer (HNSCC) in general, and could potentially do well with less 
treatment. Here, we therefore investigated whether HPV status and p53-expression 
correlated to clinical outcome in patients with CUP in the head neck region.
Fifty metastases were analyzed for presence of HPV DNA, and expression of
p16(INK4A) and p53 and the data were correlated to clinical outcome. Patients
with HPV DNA-positive (HPVDNA+) metastases had significantly better 5-year
overall survival (OS) compared to those with HPVDNA- metastases (80.0% vs. 36.7%,
respectively; P = 0.004), with a similar tendency for disease-free survival
(DFS). These survival rates showed excellent concordance with those of HPVDNA+
and HPVDNA- OSCC in Sweden during the same time period, strengthening the
hypothesis that HPVDNA+ head and neck CUP may originate from HPVDNA+ OSCC. In
addition, having absent/intermediary-low as compared to high expression of p53
correlated to a better prognosis with a 69% as compared to 14% 5-year OS,
respectively (P < 0.001), and for DFS the tendency was analogous. In conclusion, 
both HPV status and p53 expression are valuable prognostic factors in patients
with CUP in the head and neck region and should be further explored for clinical 
use.

© 2014 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cam4.199 
PMCID: PMC3987086
PMID: 24510528  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
