

818. Lin Chung Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2018 Feb;32(4):298-301. doi:
10.13201/j.issn.1001-1781.2018.04.014.

[The clinical significance of EBV DNA analysis in nasopharyngeal carcinoma
screening].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang L(1), Song YL(1), Huang SM(1), Tao HX(1), Zhao YQ(1), Yan N(2), Xu DY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Henan Province People's
Hospital (Zhengzhou University People's Hospital), Zhengzhou, 450003, China.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Henan Province People's Hospital (Zhengzhou
University People's Hospital).

Objective:The aim of this study is to explore the value of EBV DNA monitor in
high risk population of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). Method:A total of 366
cases of NPC at high risk were screened for 15 864 cases by ELISA, and 262 cases 
were randomly selected from low-risk groups. Fifty-eight nasopharyngeal carcinoma
patients were also involved. EBV DNA was detected by PCR in 366 NPC high risk
patients and followed up for 1 year. The clinical significance of EBV-DNA in
screening NPC was compared. Result:The positive rate of EBV-DNA test was 12.0% in
primary screening, EBV-DNA test in primary screening was 3.4% in low-risk
population, and EBV-DNA in nasopharyngeal carcinoma was 91.4%, The positive rate 
of the three groups was statistically significant (P<0.01); After one year
follow-up, a total of 267 cases returned visit. Positive rate of group A with
continuous high risk was significantly higher than group B who was high risk at
the first time of visit and non high risk at returned visit (Pï¼œ0.05).
Conclusion:Quantitative analysis of plasma EBV DNA in high risk population can
supply serological risk assessment. It can elevate the efficiency of screening
and has significant application value for NPC high risk population.

DOI: 10.13201/j.issn.1001-1781.2018.04.014 
PMID: 29798510  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
