

835. J Virol. 2014 Aug;88(15):8545-55. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00379-14. Epub 2014 May 21.

E1-mediated recruitment of a UAF1-USP deubiquitinase complex facilitates human
papillomavirus DNA replication.

Lehoux M(1), Gagnon D(1), Archambault J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Montreal, Quebec, Canada,
and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Université de Montréal,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(2)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Montreal, Quebec, Canada,
and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Université de Montréal,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada jacques.archambault@ircm.qc.ca.

The human papillomavirus (HPV) E1 helicase promotes viral DNA replication through
its DNA unwinding activity and association with host factors. The E1 proteins
from anogenital HPV types interact with the cellular WD repeat-containing factor 
UAF1 (formerly known as p80). Specific amino acid substitutions in E1 that impair
this interaction inhibit maintenance of the viral episome in immortalized
keratinocytes and reduce viral DNA replication by up to 70% in transient assays. 
In this study, we determined by affinity purification of UAF1 that it interacts
with three deubiquitinating enzymes in C33A cervical carcinoma cells: USP1, a
nuclear protein, and the two cytoplasmic enzymes USP12 and USP46.
Coimmunoprecipitation experiments indicated that E1 assembles into a ternary
complex with UAF1 and any one of these three USPs. Moreover, expression of E1
leads to a redistribution of USP12 and USP46 from the cytoplasm to the nucleus.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation studies further revealed that E1 recruits these
threes USPs to the viral origin in association with UAF1. The function of USP1,
USP12, and USP46 in viral DNA replication was investigated by overproduction of
catalytically inactive versions of these enzymes in transient assays. All three
dominant negative USPs reduced HPV31 DNA replication by up to 60%, an effect that
was specific, as it was not observed in assays performed with a truncated E1
lacking the UAF1-binding domain or with bovine papillomavirus 1 E1, which does
not bind UAF1. These results highlight the importance of the USP1, USP12, and
USP46 deubiquitinating enzymes in anogenital HPV DNA replication.IMPORTANCE:
Human papillomaviruses are small DNA tumor viruses that induce benign and
malignant lesions of the skin and mucosa. HPV types that infect the anogenital
tract are the etiological agents of cervical cancer, the majority of anal
cancers, and a growing proportion of head-and-neck cancers. Replication of the
HPV genome requires the viral protein E1, a DNA helicase that also interacts with
host factors to promote viral DNA synthesis. We previously reported that the E1
helicase from anogenital HPV types associates with the WD40 repeat-containing
protein UAF1. Here, we show that UAF1 bridges the interaction of E1 with three
deubiquitinating enzymes, USP1, USP12, and USP46. We further show that these
deubiquitinases are recruited by E1/UAF1 to the viral origin of DNA replication
and that overexpression of catalytically inactive versions of these enzymes
reduces viral DNA replication. These results highlight the need for an
E1-associated deubiquitinase activity in anogenital HPV genome replication.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00379-14 
PMCID: PMC4135941
PMID: 24850727  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
