

837. Rev Salud Publica (Bogota). 2016 Aug;18(4):581-591. doi:
10.15446/rsap.v18n4.47517.

Epidemiological surveillance of herpes viral encephalitis in Cordoba, Colombia.

Tique V(1), Mattar S(1), Freire M(2), Illian E(2), Camargo F(3), Vergara O(1),
Moraes-Figueiredo LT(4).

Author information: 
(1)Universidad de Cordoba, Monteria, Colombia, overgara@correo.unicordoba.edu.co.
(2)National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Buenos Aires, Argentina,
mcfreire@anlis.gov.ar.
(3)Institute for Advanced Medical Technology, Monteria, Colombia.
(4)University of SÃ£o Paulo, Brazil.

Objective To establish an epidemiological surveillance of viral herpes
encephalitis in major hospitals of Monteria, Cordoba. Methods From September 2009
to December 2011, a descriptive study of cases of viral encephalitis was made in 
three hospitals in the city of Monteria. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples from
118 patients were included in the study. Clinical aspects, as well as
cytochemical and microbiological analysis (Gram stain and culture) of CSF, were
used for selecting the patients. Virus detection was performed by using multiplex
nested PCR for Herpes simplex virus 1 and 2, Epstein Barr virus, Cytomegalovirus 
and Varicella zoster virus. Results Viral DNA of herpesvirus was detected in the 
CSFs of 30 (25.4 %) participants, as follows: 22 (18.6 %) Herpes simplex 1 and 2 
viruses, 4 (3.3 %) Cytomegalovirus and 1 (0.8 %) Varicella zoster virus.
Co-infections were observed in 3 patients (2.5 %), 1 case by HSV-VZV and 2 cases 
by CMV/HSV. The clinical manifestations of the patients included: headache (18.6 
%), fever (14.4 %), asthenia (10.1 %), seizures (9.3 %), vomiting (8.4 %), and
stiff neck (5.9 %). Thirty percent of the patients also had HIV-AIDS. A case
fatality rate of 20 % was observed for the patients. Conclusions This paper shows
that herpesvirus is a cause of infection of the CNS in patients from Cordoba.
This study contributes to the epidemiology of encephalitis, as well as to patient
management.

DOI: 10.15446/rsap.v18n4.47517 
PMID: 28453063  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
