

84. J Craniomaxillofac Surg. 2014 Oct;42(7):1506-14. doi: 10.1016/j.jcms.2014.04.022.
Epub 2014 May 10.

The prevalence of human papilloma virus (HPV) infections in oral squamous cell
carcinomas: a retrospective analysis of 88 patients and literature overview.

Krüger M(1), Pabst AM(2), Walter C(2), Sagheb K(2), Günther C(2), Blatt S(2),
Weise K(3), Al-Nawas B(2), Ziebart T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery - Plastic Surgery (Head: Univ.
Prof. Dr. Dr. W. Wagner), University Medical Center of the Johannes
Gutenberg-University Mainz, Augustusplatz 2, 55131 Mainz, Germany. Electronic
address: maximilian.krueger@unimedizin-mainz.de.
(2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery - Plastic Surgery (Head: Univ.
Prof. Dr. Dr. W. Wagner), University Medical Center of the Johannes
Gutenberg-University Mainz, Augustusplatz 2, 55131 Mainz, Germany.
(3)Institute of Virology (Head: Univ. Prof. Dr. M.J. Reddehase), University
Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz, Obere Zahlbacher Str. 
67, 55131 Mainz, Germany.

In addition to tobacco and alcohol consumption, the two main risk factors for
oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC), recent studies have revealed infections with
human papilloma virus (HPV) as an additional risk factor for OSCC development. In
the field of head and neck malignancies, the prevalence of HPV infections in
oropharyngeal cancer (OC) ranges in different studies up to 84%. While HPV
infection is discussed as an independent risk factor in this region, its
distinguished role in carcinogenesis of tumours localized to the oral cavity
remains still uncertain. In this study, we analysed the HPV status in 88
consecutive patients with OSCCs localized anterior of the palatoglossal arch who 
were treated in the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery at the
University Medical Center Mainz. The HPV status analysis was performed using
DNA-PCR and immunostaining of p16 protein. The prevalence of HPV-positive OSCCs
was about 6% (5 patients). In 3 patients the HPV subtypes 16/18 were found. No
significant differences between the HPV positive and negative patients regarding 
age, gender, smoking and alcohol consumption, localization and TNM level could be
detected. Contrary to other studies focussing on cancers of the lingual and
palatine tonsil, the prevalence of HPV infections was much lower in the oral
cavity. Therefore HPV infection might play a less important role in oral
carcinogenesis.

Copyright © 2014 European Association for Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Surgery.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcms.2014.04.022 
PMID: 24947612  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
