

851. Cancer Gene Ther. 2009 Mar;16(3):246-55. doi: 10.1038/cgt.2008.76. Epub 2008 Oct 
10.

Therapy of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma with replicative adenovirus
expressing tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-2 and chemoradiation.

McNally LR(1), Rosenthal EL, Zhang W, Buchsbaum DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiation Biology, Department of Radiation Oncology, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294-6832, USA.

Recent studies have demonstrated the efficacy of targeted therapy combined with
radiotherapy in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). We hypothesized
that a combination treatment including a replicating adenovirus armed with tissue
inhibitor of metalloproteinase-2 (TIMP-2), radiation and Cisplatin will augment
treatment response and reduce tumor growth in vivo of HNSCC xenografts. Both
single-agent (TIMP-2 virus, radiation and Cisplatin) and the combination
therapies were evaluated in vitro and in vivo. The efficacy of both single-agent 
and combination therapies in vivo was determined by monitoring tumor growth and
immunohistochemistry. Treatment with replicative Ad-TIMP-2 virus and radiation
decreased cell viability in vitro and resulted in an additional antiangiogenic
response in vivo. Tumor response rates to treatment with replicative Ad-TIMP-2,
radiation, Cisplatin or combination therapies ranged from limited inhibition of
tumor growth of the single-agent therapy to a statistically significant additive 
antitumor response with the combination therapies. Replicative
Ad-TIMP-2+radiation+Cisplatin in the SCC1 nude mice demonstrated the greatest
response rates in tumor growth and angiogenesis. Combination of Ad-TIMP-2 gene
therapy with radiation and the triple treatment group resulted in an augmented
therapeutic response. This is the first report of the potential benefits of
combining radiation and MMP inhibitor treatment.

DOI: 10.1038/cgt.2008.76 
PMCID: PMC2713186
PMID: 18846112  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
