

856. Cancer Gene Ther. 2013 Oct;20(10):582-9. doi: 10.1038/cgt.2013.55. Epub 2013 Sep 
13.

Overcoming cancer cell resistance to VSV oncolysis with JAK1/2 inhibitors.

Escobar-Zarate D(1), Liu YP, Suksanpaisan L, Russell SJ, Peng KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.

Oncolytic vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) has potent antitumor activity but some
cancer cells are resistant to VSV killing, either constitutively or due to type I
interferon (IFN) inducing an antiviral state in the cells. Here, we evaluated VSV
oncolysis of a panel of human head and neck cancer cells and showed that VSV
resistance in SCC25 and SCC15 cells could be reversed with Janus kinase (JAK) 1/2
inhibitors (JAK inhibitor I and ruxolitinib). Pre-treatment of cells with JAK1/2 
inhibitors before or in conjunction with VSV enhanced viral infection, spread and
progeny yield (100- to 1000-fold increase). In contrast, inhibitors of histone
deacetylase (LBH589), phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (GDC-0941, LY294002),
mammalian target of rapamycin (rapamycin) or signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 (STAT3 inhibitor VII) were ineffective. Compared with
VSV-sensitive SW579 cells, IFNα/β responsive antiviral genes (IRF-9, IRF-7, OAS1 
but not MxA) are constitutively expressed in SCC25 cells. Pretreatment with JAK
inhibitors reduced mRNA levels of these genes, increasing VSV expression in the
cells. Interestingly, 1 h of drug exposure was sufficient to reverse SCC25
resistance to VSV and was still effective if virus was added 24 h later. Overall,
we show here that JAK inhibitor I and ruxolitinib (Jakafi) can reverse resistance
to VSV, supporting the rationale to incorporate JAK1/2 inhibitors in future VSV
virotherapy trials.

DOI: 10.1038/cgt.2013.55 
PMCID: PMC4817541
PMID: 24030211  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
