

86. Nature. 2016 Jan 28;529(7587):541-5. doi: 10.1038/nature16481. Epub 2016 Jan 20.

Structure of the E6/E6AP/p53 complex required for HPV-mediated degradation of
p53.

Martinez-Zapien D(1), Ruiz FX(2), Poirson J(1), Mitschler A(2), Ramirez J(1),
Forster A(1), Cousido-Siah A(2), Masson M(1), Vande Pol S(3), Podjarny A(2),
Travé G(1), Zanier K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Equipe labellisée Ligue, Biotechnologie et signalisation cellulaire UMR 7242, 
Ecole Superieure de Biotechnologie de Strasbourg, Boulevard Sébastien Brant, BP
10413, F-67412 Illkirch, France.
(2)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC)/INSERM 
U964/CNRS UMR 7104/Université de Strasbourg, 1 rue Laurent Fries, BP 10142,
F-67404 Illkirch, France.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia, PO Box 800904,
Charlottesville, Virginia 22908-0904, USA.

The p53 pro-apoptotic tumour suppressor is mutated or functionally altered in
most cancers. In epithelial tumours induced by 'high-risk' mucosal human
papilloma viruses, including human cervical carcinoma and a growing number of
head-and-neck cancers, p53 is degraded by the viral oncoprotein E6 (ref. 2). In
this process, E6 binds to a short leucine (L)-rich LxxLL consensus sequence
within the cellular ubiquitin ligase E6AP. Subsequently, the E6/E6AP heterodimer 
recruits and degrades p53 (ref. 4). Neither E6 nor E6AP are separately able to
recruit p53 (refs 3, 5), and the precise mode of assembly of E6, E6AP and p53 is 
unknown. Here we solve the crystal structure of a ternary complex comprising
full-length human papilloma virus type 16 (HPV-16) E6, the LxxLL motif of E6AP
and the core domain of p53. The LxxLL motif of E6AP renders the conformation of
E6 competent for interaction with p53 by structuring a p53-binding cleft on E6.
Mutagenesis of critical positions at the E6-p53 interface disrupts p53
degradation. The E6-binding site of p53 is distal from previously described DNA- 
and protein-binding surfaces of the core domain. This suggests that, in
principle, E6 may avoid competition with cellular factors by targeting both free 
and bound p53 molecules. The E6/E6AP/p53 complex represents a prototype of viral 
hijacking of both the ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation pathway and the p53 
tumour suppressor pathway. The present structure provides a framework for the
design of inhibitory therapeutic strategies against oncogenesis mediated by human
papilloma virus.

DOI: 10.1038/nature16481 
PMCID: PMC4853763
PMID: 26789255  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
