

864. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2010 Sep;299(3):L384-92. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00096.2010. Epub 2010 Jul 2.

Monoclonal antibody-assisted structure-function analysis of the carbohydrate
recognition domain of surfactant protein D.

Hartshorn KL(1), White MR, Rynkiewicz M, Sorensen G, Holmskov U, Head J, Crouch
EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts 02118, USA. khartsho@bu.edu

Surfactant protein D (SP-D) plays important roles in host defense against a
variety of pathogens including influenza A virus (IAV). Ligand binding by SP-D is
mediated by the trimeric neck and carbohydrate recognition domain (NCRD). We used
monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against human SP-D and a panel of mutant collectin
NCRD constructs to identify functionally and structurally important epitopes. The
ability of SP-D to bind to IAV and mannan involved partially overlapping binding 
sites that are distinct from those involved in binding to the glycoprotein-340
(gp-340) scavenger receptor protein. A species-specific motif (D324,D325,R343),
which has been implicated in the specific binding of several ligands, contributes
to recognition by mAbs that block antiviral or mannan binding activity. D325, in 
particular, is involved in the epitopes of these blocking mAbs. Conversely, the
interspecies substitution of arginine for Lys343 in the rat NCRD (rK343R)
conferred binding to two of the mAbs. The single site substitution of alanine for
R349 or E347 resulted in highly selective alterations in mAb binding and caused
decreased antiviral activity. Mutations at Glu333 (E333A), Trp340 (W340F), and
Phe335 (F335A), which abrogated antiviral activity, were associated with
decreased binding to multiple blocking mAbs, consistent with critical structural 
roles. More conservative substitutions at 335, which showed a significant
increase in neutralization activity, caused selective loss of binding to one mAb.
The analysis reveals, for the first time, an extended binding site for IAV;
calcium-dependent antiviral activity involves residues flanking the primary
carbohydrate binding site as well as more remote residues displayed on the
carbohydrate recognition domain surface.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.00096.2010 
PMCID: PMC2951070
PMID: 20601494  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
