

872. J Med Virol. 2013 Mar;85(3):512-8. doi: 10.1002/jmv.23476. Epub 2012 Dec 21.

Detection of enterovirus in the thyroid tissue of patients with graves' disease.

Hammerstad SS(1), Tauriainen S, Hyöty H, Paulsen T, Norheim I, Dahl-Jørgensen K.

Author information: 
(1)The Hormone Laboratory, Oslo University Hospital-Aker, Oslo, Norway.
sara.hammerstad@medisin.uio.no

The etiology and pathogenesis of Graves' disease (GD) are still unknown, although
it is thought that both genetic and environmental factors are important. Some
indirect evidence implies that a viral infection may be a possible etiologic
factor in autoimmunity. The main objective of this study was to examine direct
evidence of the presence of enteroviruses (EVs) in the thyroid tissue of patients
with GD. Thyroid tissue from 22 patients with newly diagnosed GD was obtained by 
core needle biopsy, while tissue from 24 patients with chronic GD and 24 control 
subjects without any autoimmune thyroid diseases was collected during neck
surgery. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded thyroid tissue samples were examined
for the presence of enterovirus capsid protein using immunohistochemistry and for
enterovirus RNA using in situ hybridization. Enterovirus capsid protein was
detected in 17 (37%) patients and in 4 (17%) control subjects (P = 0.103).
Enterovirus RNA was identified in thyroid tissue from nine (20%) patients, but in
none of the control subjects (P = 0.016). Eight (90%) of the nine virus RNA
positive patients were also positive for enterovirus protein. This is the first
study to analyze thyroid tissue for EVs, including patients with untreated, newly
diagnosed GD. The results suggest that EVs are more frequently present in thyroid
tissue of patients than controls. Further studies are indicated to explore this
association to find out if a low-grade chronic enteroviral infection might be
involved in the pathogenesis of GD and if this could offer new therapeutic and
preventive opportunities.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.23476 
PMID: 23280563  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
