

873. Virus Res. 2017 Mar 2;231:166-175. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2016.11.020. Epub 2016
Nov 23.

Developments in L2-based human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccines.

Schellenbacher C(1), Roden RBS(2), Kirnbauer R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral Oncology (LVO), Division of Immunology, Allergy and
Infectious Diseases (DIAID), Department of Dermatology, Medical University of
Vienna, Austria.
(2)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Viral Oncology (LVO), Division of Immunology, Allergy and
Infectious Diseases (DIAID), Department of Dermatology, Medical University of
Vienna, Austria. Electronic address: reinhard.kirnbauer@meduniwien.ac.at.

Infections with sexually transmitted high-risk Human Papillomavirus (hrHPV), of
which there are at least 15 genotypes, are responsible for a tremendous disease
burden by causing cervical, and subsets of other ano-genital and oro-pharyngeal
carcinomas, together representing 5% of all cancer cases worldwide. HPV subunit
vaccines consisting of virus-like particles (VLP) self-assembled from major
capsid protein L1 plus adjuvant have been licensed. Prophylactic vaccinations
with the 2-valent (HPV16/18), 4-valent (HPV6/11/16/18), or 9-valent
(HPV6/11/16/18/31/33/45/52/58) vaccine induce high-titer neutralizing antibodies 
restricted to the vaccine types that cause up to 90% of cervical carcinomas, a
subset of other ano-genital and oro-pharyngeal cancers and 90% of benign
ano-genital warts (condylomata). The complexity of manufacturing multivalent
L1-VLP vaccines limits the number of included VLP types and thus the vaccines'
spectrum of protection, leaving a panel of oncogenic mucosal HPV unaddressed. In 
addition, current vaccines do not protect against cutaneous HPV types causing
benign skin warts, or against beta-papillomavirus (betaPV) types implicated in
the development of non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC) in immunosuppressed patients. 
In contrast with L1-VLP, the minor capsid protein L2 contains type-common
epitopes that induce low-titer yet broadly cross-neutralizing antibodies to
heterologous PV types and provide cross-protection in animal challenge models.
Efforts to increase the low immunogenicity of L2 (poly)-peptides and thereby to
develop broader-spectrum HPV vaccines are the focus of this review.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2016.11.020 
PMCID: PMC5549463
PMID: 27889616  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
