

880. Cancer Treat Rev. 2010 Dec;36(8):629-36. doi: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2010.03.010. Epub
2010 Apr 22.

Unravelling the biology of human papillomavirus (HPV) related tumours to enhance 
their radiosensitivity.

Vozenin MC(1), Lord HK, Hartl D, Deutsch E.

Author information: 
(1)UPRES EA 27-10 Radiosensibilité des tumeurs et tissus sains, Institut Gustave 
Roussy, Villejuif, France. vozenin@igr.fr

HPV infection is associated with most squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) of the
uterine cervix and many head and neck SCC. While recent understanding of the
mechanisms of HPV-induced carcinogenesis has lead to the development of
prophylactic vaccines, the principal modality of treatment is radiotherapy and
despite concurrent chemotherapy, outcomes remain suboptimal. Improving the
radiotherapeutic index thus remains an important challenge as well as defining
predictive assays for treatment outcome of HPV-related tumours. Therefore
elucidating the influence of the HPV virus on tumour radiosensitivity is of major
interest due to the prevalence of HPV-related tumours worldwide and due to
evidence that head and neck HPV-tumours have markedly different clinical outcomes
compared to non-HPV-related tumours. This difference may allow for different
treatment strategies to be developed. The present review aims to summarize the
current understanding of radiosensitivity and HPV-related tumour biology in order
to subsequently develop new approaches to enhance the therapeutic index. This
review also emphasizes the relevance of E6 and E7 oncoproteins to tumour cell
response to radiotherapy suggesting that specific targeted approaches such as
concomitant modulation of additional pathways using targeted therapies should
offer new therapeutic avenues.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2010.03.010 
PMID: 20417037  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
