

883. J Pak Med Assoc. 2013 Jul;63(7):882-7.

The prevalence of Epstein-Barr virus infection in head and neck non-Hodgkin's
lymphomas in Khorasan, northeast of Iran.

Abadi RZ(1), Sistani NS, Mohtasham N, Hesari KK, Vaezi T, Pazouki M, Shakeri MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral & Maxillofacial Pathology, Dental Research Center, Faculty 
of Dentistry, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the frequency and possible role of Epstein-Barr virus 
infection in non-Hodgkin's lymphomas of the oral cavity and maxillofacial region 
in Khorasan (Northeast of Iran).
METHODS: The cross-sectional retrospective study assessed the frequency of
Epstein-Barr virus infection in non-immunosuppressed non-Hodgkin's lymphoma cases
of the oral cavity and maxillofacial region. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
tissue sections from 34 cases of head and neck non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (17
low-grade B-cell lymphoma, 14 diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, and 3 peripheral T
cell lymphoma) were selected as a case group, and 10 normal lymph node sections
were considered as a control group. Polymerase chain reaction was used to detect 
the EBV-DNA in tissue specimens. SPSS 16 was used for statistical analysis of the
data.
RESULTS: EBV-DNA was detected in 26.5% of NHL samples. Among NHLs, Epstein-Barr
virus was found to be positive in 50% cases with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
and 11.8% of low grade B-cell lymphomas. Epstein-Barr virus was not detected in
any cases of peripheral T-cell lymphoma.
CONCLUSION: Although it seems that Epstein-Barr virus appears to be an
etiological factor in some subtypes of non-Hodgkin's lymphomas, especially in
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, more researches should be done to investigate the 
relationship between Epstein-Barr virus infection and head and neck non-Hodgkin's
lymphomas.


PMID: 23901714  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
