

885. J Med Virol. 2009 Nov;81(11):1975-81. doi: 10.1002/jmv.21627.

Investigation of the occurrence of torque tenovirus in malignant and potentially 
malignant disorders associated with human papillomavirus.

Fehér E(1), Gáll T, Murvai M, Kis A, Boda R, Sápy T, Tar I, Gergely L, Szarka K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Medical and Health Science Centre,
University of Debrecen, Debrecen H-4032, Hungary.

In a previous pilot study, a significantly poorer outcome of laryngeal cancer was
found in patients co-infected with human papillomavirus (HPV) and genogroup 1
torque tenovirus (TTV). The present study aimed to collect data on the overall
prevalence of TTVs on the prevalence of genogroup 1 TTV in two other malignancies
associated with HPV, oral squamous cell cancer and cervical cancer, and in oral
and cervical premalignant lesions (oral lichen planus, oral leukoplakia, cervical
atypia). Oral samples from all patients were accompanied with a sample from the
healthy mucosa. The overall prevalence of TTV was significantly higher both in
oral squamous cell cancer and cervical cancer compared with other patient groups 
or with the respective controls. The prevalence of genogroup 1 TTV was
significantly higher in lesions of oral squamous cell cancer and oral lichen
planus, but not in lesions of oral leukoplakia (24.6%, 10.1%, and 4.5%,
respectively), compared with the prevalence in the oral cavity of controls
(1.4%). Co-infection rates with genogroup 1 TTV and HPV were significantly higher
in oral squamous cell cancer than in controls, oral lichen planus or oral
leukoplakia patients (12.3%, 0.0%, 6.7%, and 4.5%, respectively). The prevalence 
of genogroup 1 TTV in all cervical samples were comparable. These data suggest
that genogroup 1 TTV may be associated specifically with some head and neck
mucosal disorders, but disproves a (co)carcinogenic role in oral cancer or
cervical cancer as well as an association with HPV or with malignancies
associated with HPV.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.21627 
PMID: 19774682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
