

887. Vaccine. 2017 Dec 4;35(48 Pt B):6712-6719. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.10.015.
Epub 2017 Oct 16.

Antibody response to human papillomavirus vaccination and natural exposure in
individuals with Fanconi Anemia.

Mehta PA(1), Sauter S(2), Zhang X(2), Davies SM(2), Wells SI(2), Myers KC(2),
Panicker G(3), Unger ER(3), Butsch Kovacic M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States. 
Electronic address: Parinda.Mehta@cchmc.org.
(2)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States.
(3)National Center for Emerging Zoonotic and Infectious Diseases, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, United States.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare genetic disorder associated with predisposition to 
head and neck and gynecological squamous cell cancers. In the general population,
these cancers are commonly linked to human papillomavirus (HPV) infection.
Antibodies to natural HPV infection and HPV vaccination were evaluated in 63
individuals with FA while considering host immune factors. Approximately 30% of
reportedly unvaccinated participants were seropositive (HPV6-38%, HPV11-25%,
HPV16-26%, and HPV18-26%). Seropositivity was significantly associated with
having had sex regardless of age (p=.007). Most participants showed
seropositivity after HPV vaccination (HPV6-100%, HPV11-100%, HPV16-100% and
HPV18-92%). Interestingly, titers for all 4 subtypes were significantly lower in 
the post-hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) participants compared to those
who received the vaccine, but had not undergone HSCT (HPV6-p=.030, HPV11-p=.003, 
HPV16-p=.018, HPV18-p=<.001). It is unclear if these titers sufficiently protect 
from new infection since protective serologic cut offs have not yet been defined 
for the HPV vaccine. Individual immune functions were not associated with HPV
seropositivity, however, underlying heterogeneous immune deficiency may explain
higher rates of seropositivity in our younger unvaccinated participants (age 4-13
years). To better measure the efficacy of HPV vaccination in those with FA and
other immune-compromised or cancer-prone disorders, future well-controlled
vaccine studies are required.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.10.015 
PMCID: PMC5696100
PMID: 29042204  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
