

888. MBio. 2018 Apr 24;9(2). pii: e00649-18. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00649-18.

Epigenetic Regulation of Tumor Suppressors by Helicobacter pylori Enhances
EBV-Induced Proliferation of Gastric Epithelial Cells.

Pandey S(1), Jha HC(1), Shukla SK(1), Shirley MK(1), Robertson ES(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, and Microbiology,
the Tumor Virology Program, Abramson Cancer Center, Perelman School of Medicine
at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Departments of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, and Microbiology,
the Tumor Virology Program, Abramson Cancer Center, Perelman School of Medicine
at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
erle@upenn.edu.

Helicobacter pylori and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) are two well-known contributors 
to cancer and can establish lifelong persistent infection in the host. This leads
to chronic inflammation, which also contributes to development of cancer.
Association with H. pylori increases the risk of gastric carcinoma, and
coexistence with EBV enhances proliferation of infected cells. Further, H.
pylori-EBV coinfection causes chronic inflammation in pediatric patients. We have
established an H. pylori-EBV coinfection model system using human gastric
epithelial cells. We showed that H. pylori infection can increase the oncogenic
phenotype of EBV-infected cells and that the cytotoxin-associated gene (CagA)
protein encoded by H. pylori stimulated EBV-mediated cell proliferation in this
coinfection model system. This led to increased expression of DNA methyl
transferases (DNMTs), which reprogrammed cellular transcriptional profiles,
including those of tumor suppressor genes (TSGs), through hypermethylation. These
findings provide new insights into a molecular mechanism whereby cooperativity
between two oncogenic agents leads to enhanced oncogenic activity of gastric
cancer cells.IMPORTANCE We have studied the cooperativity between H. pylori and
EBV, two known oncogenic agents. This led to an enhanced oncogenic phenotype in
gastric epithelial cells. We now demonstrate that EBV-driven epigenetic
modifications are enhanced in the presence of H. pylori, more specifically, in
the presence of its CagA secretory antigen. This results in increased
proliferation of the infected gastric cells. Our findings now elucidate a
molecular mechanism whereby expression of cellular DNA methyl transferases is
induced influencing infection by EBV. Hypermethylation of the regulatory genomic 
regions of tumor suppressor genes results in their silencing. This drastically
affects the expression of cell cycle, apoptosis, and DNA repair genes, which
dysregulates their associated processes, and promotion of the oncogenic
phenotype.

Copyright Â© 2018 Pandey et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00649-18 
PMCID: PMC5915740
PMID: 29691341  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
