

892. Cancer. 2012 Aug 15;118(16):3882-92. doi: 10.1002/cncr.26718. Epub 2012 Jan 26.

Exploring biomarkers in head and neck cancer.

Langer CJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA. corey.langer@uphs.upenn.edu

Erratum in
    Cancer. 2012 Dec 1;118(23):6014.

Personalized medicine based on predictive markers linked to drug response, it is 
hoped, will lead to improvements in outcomes and avoidance of unnecessary
treatment in squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN). Recent
research has shown that expression of ERCC1 may predict resistance to treatment
with platinum agents. Future testing for this marker may help select the optimal 
type of chemotherapy. Infection with human papillomavirus (HPV) is associated
with less aggressive disease and better prognosis in locally advanced SCCHN
treated with chemoradiation or radiation alone; HPV-positive patients may
ultimately benefit from less intensive, less toxic therapy. K-RAS mutations,
occurring in about 40% of colorectal cancers and associated with lack of benefit 
from epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) antibodies in this disease, are
found in <5% of SCCHN patients, making routine testing for K-RAS mutations
unwarranted at this time. Virtually all head and neck tumors overexpress EGFR,
which limits the usefulness of EGFR expression as a marker for treatment
selection. Although the incidence of EGFR tyrosine kinase domain mutations is
very rare, a better understanding of the role of EGFR mutations, expression,
amplification, and downstream effects in SCCHN may help define the role of EGFR
in this setting. These observations caution against extrapolating results
obtained with biomarkers in other types of cancer to SCCHN. Validation of each
biomarker in the context of SCCHN clinical trials will be required before a
specific marker can be incorporated into daily practice.

Copyright Â© 2012 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.26718 
PMID: 22281752  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
