

893. Semin Oncol. 2009 Oct;36(5):451-9. doi: 10.1053/j.seminoncol.2009.07.005.

Cancer of the oral cavity and pharynx in young females: increasing incidence,
role of human papilloma virus, and lack of survival improvement.

Bleyer A(1).

Author information: 
(1)St. Charles Medical Center, Bend, OR 97701, USA. ableyer@gmail.com

From 1975 to the mid 1990s, the incidence of cancer in the oral cavity and
pharynx (OC/P) declined substantively, in large part because of successful
educational and medical campaigns to reduce cigarette smoking and tobacco
chewing. Recent data, however, suggest that the incidence trend in young adults
has reversed. The current study investigated National Cancer Institute
Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results databases for changes in the incidence
of and survival from OC/P cancer. Since the mid 1990s, females in the United
States, between 10 and 40 years of age, have had a steady, apparently
accelerating, increase in the incidence of these cancers, particularly in females
15-34 years of age. Most of the increase occurred in the salivary glands and
tongue, and were of squamous, acinar, and mucoepidermoid morphologic types. All
racial/ethnic groups evaluated have shown the incidence trend pattern, with the
increase most prominent in non-Hispanic whites. Five-year survival rates for
females 15-39 years of age, when diagnosed to have OC/P cancer, show no
improvement since 1975. In contrast, older females and males of all ages continue
to demonstrate a reduction in incidence and improvement in survival. The observed
patterns are consistent with changing sexual mores and increasing orogenital
sexual practices in the United States, with transmission of human papillomavirus 
and potentially other sexually transmitted carcinogenic vectors. If so, the human
papillomavirus vaccines will have cancer prevention benefits beyond cervical
carcinoma and will be needed increasingly as the incidence of head and neck
cancer is projected to continue to rise in young women.

DOI: 10.1053/j.seminoncol.2009.07.005 
PMID: 19835740  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
