

896. Clin Adv Hematol Oncol. 2014 Dec;12(12):812-9.

The role of HPV status in recurrent/metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of the
head and neck.

Misiukiewicz K(1), Camille N(1), Gupta V(2), Bakst R(2), Teng M(2), Miles B(2),
Genden E(2), Sikora A(3), Posner M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tisch Cancer Institute, Mount Sinai Health System, New York, NY.
(2)Icahn School of Medicine, Mount Sinai Health System, New York, NY.
(3)Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX.

Although the prognostic role of human papillomavirus (HPV) in locoregionally
advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN) is well
established, its prognostic and/or predictive role in recurrent/metastatic
settings remains to be defined. Despite epidemic growth of HPV-positive
oropharyngeal carcinoma, a low recurrence rate in HPV-positive patients results
in a small number of patients entering clinical trials for recurrent and/or
metastatic SCCHN. The consequent lack of statistical power and also significant
data contamination by misclassification of HPV-positive patients leads to
premature study conclusions. Even emerging data from the analysis of 2 randomized
trials, SPECTRUM and EXTREME, do not provide enough evidence for any HPV-based
therapeutic strategy. Many upcoming studies for locally advanced disease,
including the ones with de-escalated strategies, will have an increasing number
of patients with HPV. Optimal HPV testing strategies for reliable patient
selection and HPV-driven therapeutic approaches will be essential. Here, we
comprehensively review the existing data regarding HPV status and prognostic or
predictive outcomes in recurrent/metastatic settings and discuss current
promising studies and future directions that may help in the design of upcoming
trials.


PMID: 25674839  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
