

898. J Med Virol. 2017 Apr;89(4):710-725. doi: 10.1002/jmv.24670. Epub 2016 Sep 7.

Human papillomavirus as a favorable prognostic factor in a subset of head and
neck squamous cell carcinomas: A meta-analysis.

Liu H(1)(2), Li J(2)(3), Zhou Y(2), Hu Q(2), Zeng Y(2)(4), Mohammadreza MM(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Stem Cell Research and Application, Institute of Blood Transfusion,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College (CAMS &
PUMC), Chengdu, China.
(2)Beijing Key Laboratory of Environmental and Viral Oncology, College of Life
Science and Bio-Engineering, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China.
(3)Hubei Key Laboratory of Medical Information Analysis & Tumor Diagnosis and
Treatment, Hubei, China.
(4)National Institute for Viral Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Center
for Disease Control and Prevention, and State Key Laboratory for Infectious
Disease Prevention and Control, Beijing, China.

Many epidemical and biological studies have proposed that human papillomavirus
(HPV), primarily high-risk HPV16/18, is an etiological factor for a subset of
head and neck (HN) cancers. On that premise, we systematically reviewed relevant 
articles and improved the understanding of HPV-related cancers. This article
comprehensively described the characteristics of HPV-associated HN tumors
according to demography, histopathology, molecular biology, and prognosis.
Meta-analyses were conducted to combine the studies that reported the association
between HPV status and these variables using Rev Man 5.0. The pooled results
showed that HPV-positive tumors were not only poorly differentiated (OR = 2.77,
95% CI: 2.3-3.32) and smaller (OR = 2.21, 95% CI: 1.75-2.8) but were also
strongly associated with oropharynx (OR = 5.8, 95% CI: 4.01-8.38) and node
involvement (OR = 2.77, 95% CI: 2.3-3.32). HPV-related tumors showed
significantly more p16 overexpression (OR = 34.55, 95% CI: 20.91-57.09) and less 
TP53 mutations (OR = 0.27, 95% CI: 0.18-0.41) than HPV-negative tumors. The
patients with HPV-positive cancers had different clinical behaviors, such as a
reduced risks of death (HR = 0.32, 95% CI: 0.29-0.36). This study supported the
view point that HPV is a favorable indicator of prognosis and that HPV-related HN
tumors are distinct from traditional tumors. This etiological relationship could 
impact future strategies of diagnosis, prevention, therapy, and prognosis for
this subset of patients. J. Med. Virol. 89:710-725, 2017. © 2016 Wiley
Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.24670 
PMID: 27575972  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
