

902. Int J Pharm. 2012 May 1;427(1):97-104. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2011.09.037. Epub
2011 Oct 1.

Comparison of silk-elastinlike protein polymer hydrogel and poloxamer in
matrix-mediated gene delivery.

Price R(1), Gustafson J, Greish K, Cappello J, McGill L, Ghandehari H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics and Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Utah, 
Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.

The silk-elastinlike protein polymer, SELP 815K, and poloxomer 407, a
commercially available synthetic copolymer, were evaluated to compare their
relative performance in matrix-mediated viral gene delivery. Using a xenogenic
mouse tumor model of human head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, the efficacy of
viral gene-directed enzyme prodrug therapy with these polymers was characterized 
by viral gene expression in the tumor tissue, tumor size reduction, and
survivability with treatment. Viral injection in SELP 815K produced a greater
level and more prolonged extent of gene expression in the tumor, a statistically 
greater tumor size reduction, a longer time until tumor rebound, and a
significantly increased survivability, as compared to injection of virus alone or
in Poloxamer 407. Safety of treatment with these polymers was evaluated in a
non-tumor bearing immunocompetent mouse model. Compared to virus injected alone
or in Poloxamer 407, virus injected in SELP 815K had fewer and less severe
indications of toxicity related to treatment as assessed by blood analysis, body 
weight, and histopathology of distant organs and the injection sites. Similar to 
virus alone or in Poloxamer 407, virus injected in SELP 815K elicited a mild
injection site inflammatory response characterized primarily by a mononuclear
leukocyte infiltrate and the formation of granulation tissue. Virus injected in
SELP 815K resulted in fewer animals with elevated white blood cell counts and a
less pronounced local toxicity reaction than was observed with virus in Poloxamer
407. In contrast to virus injected alone or in Poloxamer 407, which were not
retained in the injection site tissues beyond week 1, SELP 815K was retained at
the injection sites and by the end of the study (week 12), displayed limited
absorption, and mild encapsulation. These results demonstrate the benefits of
SELP 815K for matrix-mediated gene delivery over the injection of free virus and 
the injection of virus in Poloxamer 407. Virus in SELP 815K had greater efficacy 
of tumor suppression, promoted greater levels and greater duration of viral gene 
expression, and displayed reduced levels of injection site toxicity. Combining
these performance and safety benefits with the degree of control with which they 
can be designed, synthesized and formulated, SELPs continue to show promise for
their application in viral gene delivery.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2011.09.037 
PMCID: PMC3305828
PMID: 21982738  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
