

903. Oral Oncol. 2016 Nov;62:1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2016.08.016. Epub 2016 
Sep 13.

Langerhans cell number is a strong and independent prognostic factor for head and
neck squamous cell carcinomas.

Kindt N(1), Descamps G(1), Seminerio I(1), Bellier J(1), Lechien JR(1), Pottier
C(2), Larsimont D(3), Journé F(4), Delvenne P(2), Saussez S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Anatomy and Cellular Biology, Research Institute for Health
Sciences and Technology, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, University of Mons,
7000 Mons, Belgium.
(2)Department of Pathology, C.H.U. - SART TILMAN, University of Liège, 4000
Liège, Belgium.
(3)Department of Anatomopathology, Institut Jules Bordet, Université Libre de
Bruxelles, 1000 Brussels, Belgium.
(4)Laboratory of Anatomy and Cellular Biology, Research Institute for Health
Sciences and Technology, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, University of Mons,
7000 Mons, Belgium; Laboratory of Oncology and Experimental Surgery, Institut
Jules Bordet, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 1000 Brussels, Belgium.
(5)Laboratory of Anatomy and Cellular Biology, Research Institute for Health
Sciences and Technology, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, University of Mons,
7000 Mons, Belgium; Department of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, Faculty of Medicine,
Université Libre de Bruxelles, CHU Saint-Pierre, 1000 Brussels, Belgium.
Electronic address: sven.saussez@umons.ac.be.

OBJECTIVES: Head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs) exhibit great
biological heterogeneity and relatively poor prognosis. Tobacco and alcohol
consumption is involved in the cause of the majority of these cancers, but over
the last several years, Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) infection has increased
specifically in oropharyngeal cancers and become an additional risk factor. Here,
we evaluated the number of Langerhans cells (LCs) in HNSCC and reporting its
prognostic power in comparison to other risk factors.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Our clinical series was composed of 25 tumor-free
peritumoral epithelium, 64 low-grade dysplasia, 54 high-grade dysplasia and 125
carcinoma samples. HPV was detected by E6/E7 qPCR and p16 immunohistochemistry.
CD1a-positive LCs were counted in intra-tumoral and stromal compartments as well 
as lymph nodes. MIP-3α was assessed in carcinomas using immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Univariate Cox regression analyses demonstrated that high LC number is
associated with longer recurrence-free survival in both intra-tumoral and stromal
compartments and longer overall survival in stromal compartment. Tobacco and
alcohol habits, but not HPV status, are also correlated with poor prognoses in
terms of recurrence. Multivariate analyses reported stromal LC number as a strong
prognostic factor independent of tobacco, alcohol and HPV status. Moreover, LC
number is higher in tumors and invaded lymph nodes than dysplastic lesions but it
decreases in HPV-positive cancer patients. Further, LC number correlates with
MIP-3α expression.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that LC number is a significant and
independent prognostic factor for HNSCC. LC infiltration is increased in cancer
lesions but decrease with HPV infection.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2016.08.016 
PMID: 27865360  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
