

904. Saudi Med J. 2011 Sep;32(9):933-8.

Impact of pH1N1 influenza A infections on the Otolaryngology, Head and Neck
Clinic during Hajj, 2009.

Alherabi AZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Umm Al-Qura University,
and Al-Noor Specialist Hospital, Makkah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
herabi@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To examine the possible implications of the 2009 H1N1 influenza A
(pandemic flu, pH1N1) on this religious gathering and provide a response plan for
the Otolaryngology, Head and Neck (ENT) clinic during the Hajj pilgrimage.
METHODS: This study was conducted between November and December 2009. All
patients presenting to the ENT clinic at Al-Noor Specialist Hospital, Makkah,
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia were recorded. Descriptive statistics were used to
analyze the data.
RESULTS: A total of 3087 patients were included (mean age 35+/-7.8 years), of
which, 2114 were males (68.5%), and 973 females (31.5%, male to female gender
ratio=2.17:1). Among them, 1467 patients (47.5%) were Hajji and 1620 patients
(52.5%) were non-Hajji. Saudi patients comprised 1602 (51.8%), while non-Saudi's 
comprised 1485 (48.2%). Upper respiratory tract infections (URTI) including the
diagnosis of pharyngitis, viral URTI, pH1N1, and tonsillitis represented (92%) of
total diagnoses. Of these, only 77 suspected pH1N1 cases (2.5%) were observed in 
the ENT clinic. Management of 3045 patients (98.6%) included antimicrobials as
part of their main therapy.
CONCLUSION: The pH1N1 cases presenting to our ENT Hajj clinic had a minimal
impact on the clinic operation. The ENT Hajj Clinic helped alleviate pressure
from the ER. Excessive use of antibiotic usage should be discouraged.


PMID: 21894357  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
