

907. Rev Med Virol. 2015 Nov;25(6):345-53. doi: 10.1002/rmv.1834. Epub 2015 Mar 17.

Association of human papillomavirus with Fanconi anemia promotes carcinogenesis
in Fanconi anemia patients.

Liu GB(1), Chen J(2)(3), Wu ZH(4), Zhao KN(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)School of Health and Wellbeing, Faculty of Health, Engineering and Sciences,
The University of Southern Queensland, Toowoomba, Australia.
(2)School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Australia.
(3)Faculty of Science, Medicine and Health, University of Wollongong, Wollongong,
Australia.
(4)Western Sydney Genomic Diagnosis, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney,
Australia.
(5)Institute of Molecular Virology and Immunology, Department of Medical
Microbiology and Immunology, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, China.
(6)Centre for Kidney Disease Research-Venomics Research, The University of
Queensland School of Medicine, Translational Research Institute, Brisbane,
Australia.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare recessive disorder associated with chromosomal
fragility. FA patients are at very high risk of cancers, especially head and neck
squamous cell carcinomas and squamous cell carcinomas caused by infection of
human papillomaviruses (HPVs). By integrating into the host genome, HPV oncogenes
E6 and E7 drive the genomic instability to promote DNA damage and gene mutations 
necessary for carcinogenesis in FA patients. Furthermore, E6 and E7 oncoproteins 
not only inhibit p53 and retinoblastoma but also impair the FANC/BRCA signaling
pathway to prevent DNA damage repair and alter multiple signals including
cell-cycle checkpoints, telomere function, cell proliferation, and interference
of the host immune system leading to cancer development in FA patients. In this
review, we summarize recent advances in unraveling the molecular mechanisms of FA
susceptibility to HPV-induced cancers, which facilitate rational preventive and
therapeutic strategies.

Copyright Â© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/rmv.1834 
PMID: 25776992  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
