

912. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Sep 1;21(17):3821-8. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1329.

New Strategies in Human Papillomavirus-Related Oropharynx Cancer: Effecting
Advances in Treatment for a Growing Epidemic.

Massarelli E(1), Ferrarotto R(1), Glisson BS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic and Head/Neck Medical Oncology, The University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.
(2)Department of Thoracic and Head/Neck Medical Oncology, The University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. bglisson@mdanderson.org.

The past two decades have been witness to a steadily increasing incidence of
oropharynx cancer, specifically related to human papillomavirus (HPV), primarily 
affecting middle-aged Caucasian men, in North America and Europe. The
ever-increasing incidence, now clearly an epidemic, of this unique
clinicopathologic entity demands new perspectives in diagnosis and staging and
presents unique challenges in clinical research, given the excellent prognosis
afforded by chemoradiation for the majority of these patients. To reduce the
morbidity of late toxicity in survivors without compromising the high rates of
survival currently enjoyed, and simultaneously address the poor prognosis of
those with recurrence, it is critical to capitalize on the viral etiology and
translate discoveries in genomics, target/drug discovery, viral oncogenesis, and 
immunbiology to improved outcomes for patients. Herein, we review ongoing and
planned clinical research for HPV-related oropharynx cancer, the basis for which 
is constituted by prior clinical observations, knowledge of the genomic
alterations and altered biology associated with HPV-related oncogenesis, and hope
that molecularly targeted and immunomodulatory therapies can be harnessed.

Â©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1329 
PMID: 26330505  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
