

921. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2015 Oct;64(10):1329-38. doi:
10.1007/s00262-015-1734-0. Epub 2015 Jul 3.

Immunotherapy of HPV-associated cancer: DNA/plant-derived vaccines and new
orthotopic mouse models.

Venuti A(1), Curzio G, Mariani L, Paolini F.

Author information: 
(1)HPV-UNIT, Laboratory of Virology, Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, Via 
E. Chianesi 53, 00144, Rome, Italy, venuti@ifo.it.

Under the optimistic assumption of high-prophylactic HPV vaccine coverage, a
significant reduction of cancer incidence can only be expected after decades.
Thus, immune therapeutic strategies are needed for persistently infected
individuals who do not benefit from the prophylactic vaccines. However, the
therapeutic strategies inducing immunity to the E6 and/or E7 oncoprotein of HPV16
are more effective for curing HPV-expressing tumours in animal models than for
treating human cancers. New strategies/technologies have been developed to
improve these therapeutic vaccines. Our studies focussed on preparing therapeutic
vaccines with low-cost technologies by DNA preparation fused to either
plant-virus or plant-toxin genes, such as saporin, and by plant-produced
antigens. In particular, plant-derived antigens possess an intrinsic adjuvant
activity that makes these preparations especially attractive for future
development. Additionally, discrepancy in vaccine effectiveness between animals
and humans may be due to non-orthotopic localization of animal models. Orthotopic
transplantation leads to tumours giving a more accurate representation of the
parent tumour. Since HPV can cause cancer in two main localizations, anogenital
and oropharynx area, we developed two orthotopic tumour mouse models in these two
sites. Both models are bioluminescent in order to follow up the tumour growth by 
imaging and are induced by cell injection without the need to intervene
surgically. These models were utilized for immunotherapies with genetic or
plant-derived therapeutic vaccines. In particular, the head/neck orthotopic model
appears to be very promising for studies combining chemo-radio-immune therapy
that seems to be very effective in patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s00262-015-1734-0 
PMCID: PMC4554738
PMID: 26138695  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
