

927. Saudi J Kidney Dis Transpl. 2013 Nov;24(6):1199-202. doi:
10.4103/1319-2442.121285.

Kaposi's sarcoma with HHV8 infection and ANCA-associated vasculitis in a
hemodialysis patient.

Fatma LB(1), Rais L, Mebazza A, Azzouz H, Beji S, Krid M, Smaoui W, Maiz HB,
Zouaghi K, Zitouna M, Osmane AB, Moussa FB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, La Rabta Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia.

The association between Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) and human herpes virus eight
(HHV-8) infection is rarely reported in hemodialysis (HD) patients. We report
here the rare association of KS, HHV-8 and hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection as
well as syphilis in a HD patient. We report the case of a 72-year-old woman who
presented with microscopic polyangiitis with alveolar hemorrhage and pauci-immune
necrosing and crescentic glomerulonephritis as well as renal failure requiring
HD. Biological tests showed positive HCV and syphilis tests. The patient was
treated by HD and intravenous pulse, followed by oral corticosteroids and six
cyclophosphamide monthly pulses with remission of the alveolar hemorrhage, but
without renal functional recovery as the patient remained HD dependent. Five
months after the first treatment administration, she developed extensive purpuric
lesions on her lower limbs, abdomen face and neck. A skin biopsy showed KS. The
HHV-8 test was positive, with positive polymerase chain reaction-HHV8 in the
serum and skin. After immunosuppression withdrawal, the KS skin lesions regressed
rapidly without relapse after 12 months of follow-up, but alveolar hemorrhage
relapsed after 16 months of follow-up. Our case showed that the immunosuppressed 
state related to multiple factors such as aging, vasculitis, HHV-8, HCV,
syphilis, immunosuppressive therapy and HD may all have contributed to the
development of KS in our patient.

DOI: 10.4103/1319-2442.121285 
PMID: 24231484  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
