

931. Oncotarget. 2016 Aug 30;7(35):56781-56797. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.10788.

Gene expression analysis of TIL rich HPV-driven head and neck tumors reveals a
distinct B-cell signature when compared to HPV independent tumors.

Wood O(1), Woo J(1), Seumois G(2), Savelyeva N(1), McCann KJ(1), Singh D(2),
Jones T(3), Peel L(1), Breen MS(1), Ward M(1), Garrido Martin E(1),
Sanchez-Elsner T(1), Thomas G(1), Vijayanand P(1)(2), Woelk CH(1), King E(1),
Ottensmeier C(1); SPARC Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton & University Hospital
Southampton, Southampton, UK.
(2)La Jolla Institute for Allergy & Immunology, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular and Clinical Cancer Medicine, University of Liverpool,
Liverpool, UK.

Human papilloma virus (HPV)-associated head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) has a better prognosis than it's HPV negative (HPV(-)) counterpart. This 
may be due to the higher numbers of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in HPV 
positive (HPV(+)) tumors. RNA-Sequencing (RNA-Seq) was used to evaluate whether
the differences in clinical behaviour simply reflect a numerical difference in
TILs or whether there is a fundamental behavioural difference between TILs in
these two settings. Thirty-nine HNSCC tumors were scored for TIL density by
immunohistochemistry. After the removal of 16 TILlow tumors, RNA-Seq analysis was
performed on 23 TILhigh/med tumors (HPV(+) n=10 and HPV(-) n=13). Using EdgeR,
differentially expressed genes (DEG) were identified. Immune subset analysis was 
performed using Functional Analysis of Individual RNA-Seq/ Microarray Expression 
(FAIME) and immune gene RNA transcript count analysis. In total, 1,634 DEGs were 
identified, with a dominant immune signature observed in HPV(+) tumors. After
normalizing the expression profiles to account for differences in B- and T-cell
number, 437 significantly DEGs remained. A B-cell associated signature
distinguished HPV(+) from HPV(-) tumors, and included the DEGs CD200, GGA2,
ADAM28, STAG3, SPIB, VCAM1, BCL2 and ICOSLG; the immune signal relative to
T-cells was qualitatively similar between TILs of both tumor cohorts. Our
findings were validated and confirmed in two independent cohorts using TCGA data 
and tumor-infiltrating B-cells from additional HPV(+) HNSCC patients. A B-cell
associated signal segregated tumors relative to HPV status. Our data suggests
that the role of B-cells in the adaptive immune response to HPV(+) HNSCC requires
re-assessment.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.10788 
PMCID: PMC5302866
PMID: 27462861  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
