

933. Genet Mol Res. 2016 Aug 26;15(3). doi: 10.4238/gmr.15038206.

Characterization of gene methylation in human papillomavirus associated-head and 
neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Zhang HZ(1), Shan CG(2), Huang AP(3), Wang JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, The Second Hospital of
Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, Hebei, China hz_zhang15@sina.com.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, The Second Hospital of
Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, Hebei, China.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, The Children's Hospital
of Hebei, Shijiazhuang, Hebei, China.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) has become one of the most common
forms of cancer worldwide. Hypermethylation-induced silencing of tumor-associated
gene has been proposed as an important cofactor in cancer pathology. This paper
aimed to characterize the gene methylation patterns in human papillomavirus (HPV)
associated-HNSCC. TIMP3 and APC methylation status in neoplastic (N = 92) and
non-neoplastic tissues (N = 92) of HNSCC as well as their association with HPV
infection were investigated via methylation-specific PCR assays. Results
indicated that methylation level of TIMP3 was markedly higher in HPV-positive
tumors as compared with HPV-negative tumors. Both TIMP3 and APC methylation were 
associated with lymph node metastasis and higher clinical stage of tumors.
Patients with methylation at TIMP3 or APC had worse prognoses as compared to
those without these alterations. This is the first study that shows a possible
linkage between HPV infection and APC methylation. Methylation patterns of
tumor-related genes may contribute to different disease prognosis in HNSCC
according to the HPV infection status.

DOI: 10.4238/gmr.15038206 
PMID: 27706614  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
