
Conflict of interest statement: Umamaheswar Duvvuri, The University of Pittsburgh
Medical Center was awarded a Clinical Robotics Research Grant from Intuitive
Surgical, Inc. Intuitive Surgical has no direct financial relationship with any
of the authors and does not censor any research performed. Dr Duvvuri is the
director of this grant.


939. Am J Surg Pathol. 2009 Nov;33(11):1720-4. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181b6d8e6.

Papillary squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck: frequent association with
human papillomavirus infection and invasive carcinoma.

Jo VY(1), Mills SE, Stoler MH, Stelow EB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA.

Papillary squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is an uncommon variant of SCC in the
upper aerodigestive tract. It is most frequently located in the larynx,
oropharynx, and sinonasal tract, and is more common in older men. Because of its 
complex exophytic papillary architecture, histologic assessment of underlying
invasion can be challenging. Risk factors and pathogenesis are unclear. We
reviewed 31 papillary SCCs of the upper aerodigestive tract seen at our
institution over a 17-year period with respect to p16 immunoreactivity and human 
papillomavirus (HPV) status. Twelve papillary SCCs were associated with invasive 
SCC in their disease course. In our study, more than two-thirds of papillary SCCs
in the upper aerodigestive tract were immunoreactive with antibody to p16 and 68%
of those lesions had identifiable high-risk HPV by in situ hybridization. As with
other HPV-associated SCCs of the upper aerodigestive tract, the majority of
HPV-associated papillary SCCs are oropharyngeal (base of tongue and palatine
tonsils), although both sinonasal and laryngeal tumors were also associated with 
infection (67% and 33% of cases, respectively). Given the better prognosis of
HPV-associated SCCs of the upper aerodigestive tract, it may be prudent to report
the p16 and HPV status of these tumors when they are encountered.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181b6d8e6 
PMID: 19745700  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
