

942. Infect Genet Evol. 2013 Jul;17:137-41. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2013.04.007. Epub
2013 Apr 17.

The VNTR polymorphism of the CLEC4M gene and susceptibility to HIV-1 infection in
Han Chinese population.

Li H(1), Fu WP, Hong ZH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Southeast University School 
of Medicine, Nanjing 210009, China. lihui19801019@yahoo.cn

C-type lectin domain family 4, member M (CLEC4M, also known as DC-SIGNR) is a
C-type lectin that functions as a transreceptor for human immunodeficiency
virus-1 (HIV-1). The relationship between variable number tandem repeat (VNTR)
polymorphism of the DC-SIGNR gene and susceptibility to HIV-1 infection has been 
under debate. In the present study, a cohort of 287 HIV-1 seropositive patients
and 388 ethnically age-matched healthy controls from Han Chinese population were 
enrolled in order to determine the influence of host genetic factors on HIV-1
infection. A total of 11 genotypes and 5 alleles were found in our population. A 
cross-sectional comparison between HIV-1 seropositive patients and healthy
controls did not reveal significant differences with regards to DC-SIGNR genotype
distribution, allele frequencies and homozygotes proportion. In addition,
previous studies showed that DC-SIGNR might play different roles in different HIV
infection routes. We stratified the patients into two subgroups: sexual contact
patients and intravenous drug abuser/blood transfusion patients. Our results
showed the frequencies of DC-SIGNR genotypes/alleles in these two subgroups were 
similar. To our knowledge, this is the first study performed in Northern Chinese.
Our findings suggested that DC-SIGNR neck region VNTR polymorphism was not
directly associated with hosts' predisposition for HIV-1 infection and not
associated with the HIV-1 routes of infection. By lack of HIV-1 exposed
seronegative (HESN) individuals and relative small sample size in present study
made our conclusions not strong enough. In addition, the role of the DC-DIGNR
neck region in different HIV-1 infection routes remains open for future study.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2013.04.007 
PMID: 23602836  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
