

948. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2013 Nov;49(5):855-65. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2013-0003OC.

Reactive oxygen species induce antiviral innate immune response through IFN-λ
regulation in human nasal epithelial cells.

Kim HJ(1), Kim CH, Ryu JH, Kim MJ, Park CY, Lee JM, Holtzman MJ, Yoon JH.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, Chung-Ang University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of South Korea.

This study sought to explore the role of the IFN-related innate immune responses 
(IFN-β and IFN-λ) and of reactive oxygen species (ROS) after influenza A virus
(IAV) infection for antiviral innate immune activity in normal human nasal
epithelial (NHNE) cells that are highly exposed to IAV. Passage-2 NHNE cells were
inoculated with the IAV WSN/33 for 1, 2, and 3 days to assess the capacity of IFN
and the relationship between ROS generation and IFN-λ secretion for controlling
IAV infection. Viral titers and IAV mRNA levels increased after infection. In
concert with viral titers, we found that the generation of IFNs, such as IFN-β,
IFN-λ1, and IFN-λ2/3, was induced after IAV infection until 3 days after
infection. The induction of IFN-λ gene expression and protein secretion may be
predominant after IAV infection. Similarly, we observed that intracellular ROS
generation increased 60 minutes after IAV infection. Viral titers and mRNA levels
of IAV were significantly higher in cases with scavenging ROS, in cases with an
induced IFN-λ mRNA level, or where the secreted protein concentration of IFN-λ
was attenuated after the suppression of ROS generation. Both mitochondrial and
dual oxidase (Doux)2-generated ROS were correlated with IAV mRNA and viral
titers. The inhibition of mitochondrial ROS generation and the knockdown of Duox2
gene expression highly increased IAV viral titers and decreased IFN-λ secretion. 
Our findings suggest that the production of ROS may be responsible for IFN-λ
secretion to control IAV infection. Both mitochondria and Duox2 are possible
sources of ROS generation, which is required to initiate an innate immune
response in NHNE cells.

DOI: 10.1165/rcmb.2013-0003OC 
PMCID: PMC5455605
PMID: 23786562  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
