

95. J Cell Mol Med. 2014 Apr;18(4):635-45. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12211. Epub 2013 Dec 18.

Verrucous carcinoma of the head and neck - not a human papillomavirus-related
tumour?

Odar K(1), Kocjan BJ, Hošnjak L, Gale N, Poljak M, Zidar N.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Pathology, University of Ljubljana,
Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Association between verrucous carcinoma (VC) of the head and neck and human
papillomaviruses (HPV) is highly controversial. Previous prevalence studies
focused mostly on α-PV, while little is known about other PV genera. Our aim was 
to investigate the prevalence of a broad spectrum of HPV in VC of the head and
neck using sensitive and specific molecular assays. Formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded samples of 30 VC and 30 location-matched normal tissue samples 
were analysed, by using six different polymerase chain reaction-based methods
targeting DNA of at least 87 HPV types from α-PV, β-PV, γ-PV and μ-PV genera, and
immunohistochemistry against p16 protein. α-PV, γ-PV and μ-PV were not detected. 
β-PV DNA was detected in 5/30 VC (16.7%) and in 18/30 normal tissue samples
(60.0%): HPV-19, -24 and -36 were identified in VC, and HPV-5, -9, -12, -23, -24,
-38, -47, -49 and -96 in normal tissue, whereas HPV type was not determined in
2/5 cases of VC and in 6/18 normal tissue samples. p16 expression was detected in
a subset of samples and was higher in VC than in normal tissue. However, the
reaction was predominantly cytoplasmic and only occasionally nuclear, and the
extent of staining did not exceed 75%. Our results indicate that α-PV, γ-PV and
μ-PV are not associated with aetiopathogenesis of VC of the head and neck. β-PV
DNA in a subset of VC and normal tissue might reflect incidental colonization,
but its potential biological significance needs further investigation.

© 2013 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/jcmm.12211 
PMCID: PMC4000115
PMID: 24350715  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
