

953. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e32657. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032657. Epub 2012 Mar 20.

Examining the incidence of human papillomavirus-associated head and neck cancers 
by race and ethnicity in the U.S., 1995-2005.

Cole L(1), Polfus L, Peters ES.

Author information: 
(1)Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, School of Public Health,
Epidemiology, New Orleans, Louisiana, United States of America. lcole@lsuhsc.edu

BACKGROUND: Head and neck cancer (HNC) incidence, mortality and survival rates
vary by sex and race, with men and African Americans disproportionately affected.
Risk factors for HNC include tobacco and alcohol exposure, with a recent
implication of human papillomavirus (HPV) in the pathogenesis of HNC. This study 
describes the epidemiology of HNC in the United States, examining variation of
rates by age, sex, race/ethnicity and potential HPV-association.
METHODS: We used the North American Association of Central Cancer Registries
(NAACCR) Cancer in North America (CINA) Deluxe Analytic Data to analyze HNC
incidence for 1995-2005 from forty population-based cancer registries. We
calculated age-adjusted incidence rates and incidence trends using annual percent
change by age, sex, race/ethnicity and HPV-association.
RESULTS: Males and Non-Hispanic Blacks experienced greater HNC incidence compared
to women and other race/ethnicity groupings. A significant overall increase in
HNC incidence was observed among HPV-associated sites during 1995-2005, while non
HPV-associated sites experienced a significant decline in HNC incidence. Overall,
younger age groups, Non-Hispanic Whites and Hispanics experienced greater
increases in incidence for HPV-associated sites, while HNC incidence declined for
Non-Hispanic Blacks independent of HPV-association. In particular, for
HPV-associated sites, HNC incidence for Non-Hispanic White males aged 45-54
increased at the greatest rate, with an APC of 6.28% (p<0.05). Among non
HPV-associated sites, Non-Hispanic Black males aged 0-44 years experienced the
greatest reduction in incidence (APC, -8.17%, p<0.05), while a greater decline
among the older, 55-64 year age group (APC, -5.44%, p<0.05) occurred in females.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides evidence that HPV-associated tumors are
disproportionately affecting certain age, sex and race/ethnicity groups,
representing a different disease process for HPV-associated tumors compared to
non HPV-associated tumors. Our study suggests that HPV tumor status should be
incorporated into treatment decisions for HNC patients to improve prognosis and
survival.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032657 
PMCID: PMC3308956
PMID: 22448226  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
