

961. Am J Surg Pathol. 2010 Jun;34(6):800-5. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181d9ba21.

Lymphoepithelial-like carcinoma of the oropharynx: a morphologic variant of
HPV-related head and neck carcinoma.

Singhi AD(1), Stelow EB, Mills SE, Westra WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD
21231-2410, USA.

Human papillomavirus-associated squamous cell cancer of the head and neck
(HPV-HNSCC) represents an important subgroup of head and neck cancer that is
characterized by distinct epidemiologic, clinical, and pathologic features
including a relatively constant microscopic appearance. For those cancers that
deviate from the morphologic prototype, an association with HPV may not be
recognized and accurate tumor classification may not be achieved. We have
identified 22 cases of HPV-HNSCC with well-developed lymphoepithelial features
including tumor cells with syncytial cytoplasm, vesicular nuclei, and large
central nucleoli dispersed in an inflammatory background as cell clusters or
single cells. The pattern closely resembles Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-induced
undifferentiated carcinoma of the nasopharynx. Indeed, 3 of the carcinomas
presenting as lymph node metastases were originally misdiagnosed as metastatic
nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Unlike nasopharyngeal carcinoma, the cases were of
oropharyngeal origin, p16 positive by immunohistochemistry (22 of 22, 100%),
HPV-16 positive by in-situ hybridization (19 of 22, 86%), and EBV negative by
in-situ hybridization (21 of 21, 100%). Like conventional HPV-related HNSCC, the 
cases tended to occur in patients below 60 years of age (77%), men (73%), and
nonsmokers (59%). For carcinomas of the head and neck that exhibit
lymphoepithelial features, one cannot assume an EBV-driven process by morphology 
alone. HPV testing has disclosed a previously unrecognized morphologic variant of
HPV-HNSCC that is microscopically indistinguishable from EBV-related carcinoma.
For lymphoepithelial carcinomas presenting as cervical lymph node metastases,
testing for HPV and EBV is mandatory.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181d9ba21 
PMID: 20421782  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
