

963. Hum Pathol. 2013 Nov;44(11):2385-92. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.07.011. Epub
2013 Sep 24.

Verrucous carcinomas of the head and neck, including those with associated
squamous cell carcinoma, lack transcriptionally active high-risk human
papillomavirus.

Patel KR(1), Chernock RD, Zhang TR, Wang X, El-Mofty SK, Lewis JS Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Most oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) and histologic variants harbor 
transcriptionally active human papillomavirus (HPV). While HPV DNA can be found
in many non-oropharyngeal head and neck carcinomas, transcriptionally active HPV 
is rare. Verrucous carcinoma is a variant with bland cytology, warty appearance, 
locally destructive growth, and lack of metastasis when lacking a frankly
invasive carcinoma component. Studies have shown variable rates of HPV DNA and
p16 protein expression in such tumors but still have not clearly addressed if the
virus has biological activity or clinical relevance in the positive cases.
Department files were searched for verrucous neoplasms, including pure verrucous 
carcinoma, verrucous carcinoma with dysplasia or minimal invasion, and SCC
arising in verrucous carcinoma (ie, having a major component of frankly invasive 
carcinoma). p16 immunohistochemistry, HPV DNA polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and
E6/E7 mRNA reverse transcription PCR for high-risk HPV types were performed. Of
the 49 cases, 6 (12.2%) showed strong (>50%) staining for p16. HPV DNA was
detected in 7/49 (14.3%) cases, but only one case was positive for both p16, and 
HPV DNA. A total of 36 cases yielded sufficient RNA for RT-PCR (18 verrucous
carcinomas, 13 atypical verrucous carcinomas, and 5 SCC arising in verrucous
carcinoma). All 36 were negative, including the four p16-positive and three HPV
DNA-positive tumors tested. Although a minority of verrucous carcinoma lesions
are p16 and HPV DNA positive, transcriptionally active high-risk HPV is uniformly
absent. These findings argue that verrucous carcinoma and its related squamous
cell carcinomas are not HPV-driven tumors.

Â© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.07.011 
PMID: 24071016  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
