

970. Cancer Res. 2012 Oct 1;72(19):4993-5003. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3934. Epub
2012 Sep 18.

Viral RNA patterns and high viral load reliably define oropharynx carcinomas with
active HPV16 involvement.

Holzinger D(1), Schmitt M, Dyckhoff G, Benner A, Pawlita M, Bosch FX.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck
Surgery, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany.
D.Holzinger@dkfz-heidelberg.de

Comment in
    Cancer Res. 2012 Oct 1;72(19):4896-8.

Oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas (OPSCC) that are associated with human
papilloma virus (HPV) infection carry a more favorable prognosis than those that 
are HPV-negative. However, it remains unclear which biomarker(s) can reliably
determine which OPSCC specimens are truly driven by HPV infection. In this study,
we analyzed 199 fresh-frozen OPSCC specimens for HPV DNA, viral load, RNA
expression patterns typical for cervical carcinomas (CxCaRNA(+)), and the
HPV-targeted tumor suppressor protein p16(INK4a) as markers for HPV infection. In
this set of specimens, there was a 49% prevalence of DNA for the
cancer-associated HPV type 16 (HPV(+)). However, there was only a 16% prevalence 
of high viral load and only a 20% prevalence of CxCaRNA(+), a marker of HPV16
carcinogenic activity. Among the CxCaRNA(+) tumors, 78% of the specimens
exhibited overexpression of p16(INK4a), which also occurred in 14% of the
HPV-negative tumors. Using a multivariate survival analysis with HPV negativity
as the reference group, CxCaRNA(+) as a single marker conferred the lowest risk
of death [HR = 0.28, 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.13-0.61] from oropharyngeal 
cancer, closely followed by high viral load (HR = 0.32, 95% CI, 0.14-0.73). In
contrast, a weaker inverse association was found for OPSCC that were HPV(+) and
p16(INK4a) high (HR = 0.55, 95% CI, 0.29-1.08). In summary, our findings argued
that viral load or RNA pattern analysis is better suited than p16(INK4a)
expression to identify HPV16-driven tumors in OPSCC patient populations.

Â©2012 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3934 
PMID: 22991302  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
