

971. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2017 Sep;36(3):449-461. doi: 10.1007/s10555-017-9686-9.

The role of human papillomavirus on the prognosis and treatment of oropharyngeal 
carcinoma.

Fung N(1), Faraji F(1), Kang H(2), Fakhry C(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, 601 N. Caroline Street, Sixth Floor, Baltimore, MD, 21287,
USA.
(2)Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, 601 N. Caroline Street, Sixth Floor, Baltimore, MD, 21287,
USA. cfakhry@jhmi.edu.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Baltimore, MD, USA. cfakhry@jhmi.edu.

Human papillomavirus positive oropharyngeal cancer (HPV-positive OPC) is a
distinct subtype of head and neck carcinoma (HNC) distinguished from HPV-negative
HNC by its risk factor profile, clinical behavior, and molecular biology.
Compared to HPV-negative HNC, HPV-positive OPC exhibits significantly better
prognosis and an enhanced response to treatment. Recognition of the survival
benefit of HPV-positive tumors has led to therapeutic de-intensification
strategies aiming to mitigate treatment-related toxicities while maintaining high
response rates. In this review, we summarize key aspects of oral HPV infection
and the molecular mechanisms of HPV-related carcinogenesis. We review the
clinical and molecular characteristics of HPV-positive OPC that contribute to its
improved prognosis compared to HPV-negative HNC. We also discuss current and
emerging treatment strategies, emphasizing potential mechanisms of treatment
sensitivity and the role of therapeutic de-intensification in HPV-positive OPC.
Lastly, we examine literature on the management and prognosis of
recurrent/metastatic HPV-positive OPC with a focus on the role of salvage surgery
in its management.

DOI: 10.1007/s10555-017-9686-9 
PMID: 28812214  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
