

975. Clin Cancer Res. 2017 Apr 1;23(7):1809-1819. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-16-1818. 
Epub 2016 Nov 9.

BAI1 Orchestrates Macrophage Inflammatory Response to HSV Infection-Implications 
for Oncolytic Viral Therapy.

Bolyard C(1)(2), Meisen WH(1)(2), Banasavadi-Siddegowda Y(1)(2), Hardcastle J(1),
Yoo JY(1)(2), Wohleb ES(3), Wojton J(1), Yu JG(2)(4), Dubin S(1)(2), Khosla
M(2)(4), Xu B(2), Smith J(1), Alvarez-Breckenridge C(1)(2), Pow-Anpongkul
P(1)(2), Pichiorri F(5), Zhang J(2)(6), Old M(2)(4), Zhu D(7), Van Meir EG(7),
Godbout JP(2)(3), Caligiuri MA(2), Yu J(2), Kaur B(8)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, The Ohio State University College of
Medicine, Columbus, Ohio.
(2)The James Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus,
Ohio.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center,
Columbus, Ohio.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, The Ohio State University
College of Medicine, Columbus, Ohio.
(5)Department of Hematology, City of Hope Cancer Center, Duarte, California.
(6)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Center for Biostatistics, The Ohio State
University College of Medicine, Columbus, Ohio.
(7)Departments of Neurosurgery and Hematology and Medical Oncology, School of
Medicine and Winship Cancer Institute, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia.
(8)Department of Neurological Surgery, The Ohio State University College of
Medicine, Columbus, Ohio. Balveen.Kaur@osumc.edu.

Purpose: Brain angiogenesis inhibitor (BAI1) facilitates phagocytosis and
bacterial pathogen clearance by macrophages; however, its role in viral
infections is unknown. Here, we examined the role of BAI1, and its N-terminal
cleavage fragment (Vstat120) in antiviral macrophage responses to oncolytic
herpes simplex virus (oHSV).Experimental Design: Changes in infiltration and
activation of monocytic and microglial cells after treatment of glioma-bearing
mice brains with a control (rHSVQ1) or Vstat120-expressing (RAMBO) oHSV was
analyzed using flow cytometry. Co-culture of infected glioma cells with
macrophages or microglia was used to examine antiviral signaling. Cytokine array 
gene expression and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) helped evaluate changes in
macrophage signaling in response to viral infection. TNFα-blocking antibodies and
macrophages derived from Bai1-/- mice were used.Results: RAMBO treatment of mice 
reduced recruitment and activation of macrophages/microglia in mice with brain
tumors, and showed increased virus replication compared with rHSVQ1. Cytokine
gene expression array revealed that RAMBO significantly altered the macrophage
inflammatory response to infected glioma cells via altered secretion of TNFα.
Furthermore, we showed that BAI1 mediated macrophage TNFα induction in response
to oHSV therapy. Intracranial inoculation of wild-type/RAMBO virus in Bai1-/- or 
wild-type non-tumor-bearing mice revealed the safety of this
approach.Conclusions: We have uncovered a new role for BAI1 in facilitating
macrophage anti-viral responses. We show that arming oHSV with antiangiogenic
Vstat120 also shields them from inflammatory macrophage antiviral response,
without reducing safety. Clin Cancer Res; 23(7); 1809-19. ©2016 AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-16-1818 
PMCID: PMC5380537
PMID: 27852701  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
