

98. J Med Virol. 2015 Feb;87(2):281-6. doi: 10.1002/jmv.24052. Epub 2014 Aug 22.

Low prevalence of human papillomavirus in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
in Chinese patients.

Xu Y(1), Liu S, Yi H, Wang J, Luo Y, Yin S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated
Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai, China; Department of Head and Neck Surgery,
Renji Hospital of Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai,
China; Otolaryngological Institute of Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai,
China.

The aim of this study was to ascertain the prevalence and prognostic value of
human papillomavirus (HPV) infection status in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma. Immunohistochemistry and GenoArray HPV genotyping assays were used to 
evaluate the HPV infection status of 256 Chinese patients with head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma. Long-term survival rates were calculated using the
Kaplan-Meier method. Immunostaining for p16 was prevalent in 6.6% (17/256) of
patients, whereas HPV infection was detected in 9 of 256 (3.5%) patients using
the HPV genotyping test. None of the p16-negative subjects were found to have HPV
infection according to the HPV genotyping test. P16 positivity was more common
among nonsmokers than smokers (16.3% vs. 4.7%, respectively; P = 0.02). Among
nine HPV-positive cases, seven were infected with HPV-16, one with HPV-33, and
one with both HPV-16 and HPV-11. The 3-year overall survival rate was 87.5% for
p16-positive/HPV-positive patients, 75.0% for p16-positive/HPV-negative patients,
and 76.9% for p16-negative/HPV-negative patients (P = 0.30). A very low rate of
HPV infection was found among the study patients. HPV infection status may not be
a useful prognostic marker for head and neck cancer patients.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.24052 
PMID: 25156555  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
