

985. Int J Oncol. 2016 Aug;49(2):803-11. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3563. Epub 2016 Jun 3.

Prevalence and associated survival of high-risk HPV-related adenoid cystic
carcinoma of the salivary glands.

Qian X(1), Kaufmann AM(2), Chen C(1), Tzamalis G(1), Hofmann VM(1), Keilholz
U(3), Hummel M(4), Albers AE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Clinic for Gynecology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus Mitte and
Benjamin Franklin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Charité Comprehensive Cancer Center, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Charitéplatz 1, 10117 Berlin, Germany.
(4)Department of Pathology, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Charité,
Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany.

Adenoid cystic carcinoma (SACC) is a rare malignancy, but a frequent subtype in
minor and major salivary glands. The molecular alterations or biomarkers that
underlie its development and progression as well as therapy outcomes are poorly
characterized. The main study goal was to investigate reliable biomarkers and
patient-related factors that may have impact on recurrence and long-term survival
of SACC. The prevalence of human papilloma virus (HPV) in SACC was determined by 
HPV-DNA genotyping and p16 immunostaining. Epithelial growth factor receptor
(EGFR), p53 and Ki-67 expression were also evaluated. Twenty-eight (42%) of 67
patients were HPV-DNA positive. Kaplan-Meier analysis indicated that SACC
patients with metastases (P=0.03) had a poor overall survival (OS) and a shorter 
recurrence-free survival (P<0.001). Positive resection margins significantly
predicted shorter recurrence-free survival (P=0.01). In the multivariate
analysis, non-metastatic disease (P=0.033) and p16 positivity (P=0.005) have
shown their prediction value for OS while non-metastatic disease (P=0.002), HPV
positivity (P=0.041) and negative resection margin predicted a better
recurrence-free survival. The present study documents for the first time the
positivity for HPV infection and overexpression of certain markers (p16, Ki-67,
EGFR and p53) used in diagnostics in SACC as well as characterizes clinical
entities. These factors might be exploited in the future as biomarkers for its
prognostic value. Using the clinical and pathological basis for predicting
different outcomes could significantly facilitate SACC stratification and
potentially directing treatment.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3563 
PMID: 27279281  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
