

996. Tumour Biol. 2017 May;39(5):1010428317701651. doi: 10.1177/1010428317701651.

Tim-3-expressing macrophages are functionally suppressed and expanded in oral
squamous cell carcinoma due to virus-induced Gal-9 expression.

Dong J(1), Cheng L(1), Zhao M(1), Pan X(1), Feng Z(1), Wang D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stomatology, The Third Hospital of Hebei Medical University,
Shijiazhuang, P.R. China.

Oropharyngeal head and neck squamous cell carcinoma is a common malignant tumor
in the oral cavity. High-risk human papillomavirus 16 infection is a major cause 
of oropharyngeal head and neck squamous cell carcinoma development. Strong
antitumor immune responses, especially CD8+ T cell responses, are thought to be
essential to effective cancer treatment and are associated with better prognosis 
in oropharyngeal head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. In this study, we
examined the role of the Tim-3/Gal-9 pathway in oropharyngeal head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma patients. We found that Gal-9 expression by CD4+ T cells 
was increased in human papillomavirus-positive oropharyngeal head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma patients, but not in human papillomavirus-negative
oropharyngeal head and neck squamous cell carcinoma patients. Increased Gal-9
secretion by CD4+ T cells presented multiple immunosuppressive effects.
Coculturing monocytes with high Gal-9-expressing CD4+ T cells resulted in the
expansion of Tim-3+ monocytes, which suppressed interferon gamma production by
activated CD8+ T cells. Subsequently, total monocytes incubated with exogenous
Gal-9, or high Gal-9-expressing CD4+ T cells, suppressed the expression of
interferon gamma by CD8+ T cells. Exogenous Gal-9 and high Gal-9-expressing CD4+ 
T cells also suppressed the secretion of both interleukin 10 and interleukin 12
by monocytes. These effects are Tim-3/Gal-9-dependent because blocking Tim-3
and/or Gal-9 could enhance the support of CD8+ T cell interferon gamma production
and the interleukin 10 and interleukin 12 secretion by monocytes. Together, these
data suggest that the high Tim-3 expression in monocytes could be utilized by
tumor-promoting Gal-9 expression on CD4+ T cells. Immunotherapy in human
papillomavirus-positive oropharyngeal head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
patients therefore faces an additional challenge posed by Tim-3 and Gal-9 and
likely requires the blockade of these molecules.

DOI: 10.1177/1010428317701651 
PMID: 28466780  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
