

997. Semin Diagn Pathol. 2015 Jan;32(1):42-53. doi: 10.1053/j.semdp.2015.02.023. Epub 
2015 Feb 27.

The pathology of HPV-related head and neck cancer: implications for the
diagnostic pathologist.

Westra WH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore,
Maryland; Department of Oncology, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions,
Baltimore, Maryland; Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, The
Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland. Electronic address:
wwestra@jhmi.edu.

A subset of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas are caused by the human
papillomavirus (HPV). This HPV-related form of head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HPV-HNSCC) has captured the attention of the oncology community for
its rising incidence, its link to non-traditional risk factors, and its divergent
clinical behavior. To diagnose this special form of head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma is to provide important prognostic information and, in some instances, 
redirect clinical therapy. The diagnosis of HPV-HNSCC is aided by a strong
appreciation for its characteristic microscopic findings and by an awareness of
aberrant features that set apart a growing list of HPV-HNSCC morphologic
variants. This review will delineate the microscopic appearance of HPV-HNSCC,
spotlight ways in which the misinterpretation of these microscopic features can
lead to diagnostic confusion, offer recommendations for appropriate terminology
when diagnosing HPV-HNSCC, and provide examples of specific diagnostic scenarios 
where HPV testing can inform the diagnostic process.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.semdp.2015.02.023 
PMID: 25804343  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
