

998. Semin Diagn Pathol. 2015 Jan;32(1):32-41. doi: 10.1053/j.semdp.2014.12.002. Epub 
2014 Dec 20.

Cytologic evaluation of cervical lymph node metastases from cancers of unknown
primary origin.

Pusztaszeri MP(1), Faquin WC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Geneva University Hospital, 1 rue Michel-Servet,
Geneva 14 1211, Switzerland. Electronic address: Marc.Pusztaszeri@hcuge.ch.
(2)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts; Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.

Fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) is often the first diagnostic procedure
performed in patients with head and neck (HN) masses. Metastatic squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC) to cervical lymph nodes is by far the most common malignancy
aspirated in the HN, but in approximately 3-10% of patients, a primary tumor will
not be found even after complete clinico-radiological workup. Several HN cancers 
are associated with oncogenic viruses, including HPV-associated SCC and
EBV-associated nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). While the primary tumor is
sometimes small or undetectable, patients often present initially with cervical
lymph node metastases. HPV-associated SCC and EBV-associated NPC are typically
non-keratinizing carcinomas that can mimic several other poorly differentiated HN
cancers by FNAB but have a significantly better prognosis. Therefore, the precise
classification of the metastatic disease in the FNAB material is very useful
since it can facilitate the subsequent location of the primary tumor, and it can 
provide prognostic and therapeutic information as well. In this review, we
discuss the major entities that can present as a metastatic cancer of unknown
primary in cervical lymph node other than supraclavicular, including their
cytologic features and the role of ancillary studies.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.semdp.2014.12.002 
PMID: 25618223  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
