

10. Cancer Sci. 2018 Jan;109(1):241-249. doi: 10.1111/cas.13440. Epub 2017 Dec 7.

Investigating the hepatitis B virus life cycle using engineered reporter
hepatitis B viruses.

Nishitsuji H(1), Harada K(1), Ujino S(1), Zhang J(2), Kohara M(3), Sugiyama M(1),
Mizokami M(1), Shimotohno K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Hepatitis and Immunology, National Center for Global
Health and Medicine, Ichikawa, Japan.
(2)Research and Development Center, FUSO Pharmaceutical Industries, Osaka, Japan.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of
Medical Science, Tokyo, Japan.

Chronic infection with hepatitis B virus (HBV) increases the risk of developing
fibrosis, cirrhosis or hepatocellular carcinoma. Current therapies are limited to
type-I interferons and/or nucleos(t)ide analogues; however, these are only
partially effective. The development of novel anti-HBV agents for new treatment
strategies has been hampered by the lack of a suitable system that allows the
in vitro replication of HBV. Studies of virus infection/replication at the
molecular level using wild-type HBV are labor-intensive and time-consuming. To
overcome these problems, we previously constructed a recombinant reporter HBV
bearing the NanoLuc gene and showed its usefulness in identifying factors that
affect HBV proliferation. Because this system mimics the early stage of the HBV
life cycle faithfully, we conducted a quantitative analysis of HBV infectivity to
several human hepatocyte cell lines as well as the effect of dimethyl sulfoxide
and HBV protein X on the early stage of HBV proliferation using this system.
Furthermore, we developed a system to produce a reporter HBV expressing a pol
gene. These reporter HBV may provide an opportunity to enhance our understanding 
of the HBV life cycle and aid strategies for the development of new anti-HBV
agents.

© 2017 The Authors. Cancer Science published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd 
on behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.13440 
PMCID: PMC5765299
PMID: 29121422  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
