

12. PLoS One. 2017 Oct 24;12(10):e0186982. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0186982.
eCollection 2017.

PRMT5: A novel regulator of Hepatitis B virus replication and an arginine
methylase of HBV core.

Lubyova B(1), Hodek J(1), Zabransky A(1), Prouzova H(1), Hubalek M(1), Hirsch
I(1)(2), Weber J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry of the Czech Academy of
Sciences, IOCB & Gilead Research Center, Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)Dept. Genetics and Microbiology, Faculty of Sciences, Charles University,
Prague, Czech Republic.

In mammals, protein arginine methyltransferase 5, PRMT5, is the main type II
enzyme responsible for the majority of symmetric dimethylarginine formation in
polypeptides. Recent study reported that PRMT5 restricts Hepatitis B virus (HBV) 
replication through epigenetic repression of HBV DNA transcription and
interference with encapsidation of pregenomic RNA. Here we demonstrate that PRMT5
interacts with the HBV core (HBc) protein and dimethylates arginine residues
within the arginine-rich domain (ARD) of the carboxyl-terminus. ARD consists of
four arginine rich subdomains, ARDI, ARDII, ARDIII and ARDIV. Mutation analysis
of ARDs revealed that arginine methylation of HBc required the wild-type status
of both ARDI and ARDII. Mass spectrometry analysis of HBc identified multiple
potential ubiquitination, methylation and phosphorylation sites, out of which
lysine K7 and arginines R150 (within ARDI) and R156 (outside ARDs) were shown to 
be modified by ubiquitination and methylation, respectively. The HBc symmetric
dimethylation appeared to be linked to serine phosphorylation and nuclear import 
of HBc protein. Conversely, the monomethylated HBc retained in the cytoplasm.
Thus, overexpression of PRMT5 led to increased nuclear accumulation of HBc, and
vice versa, down-regulation of PRMT5 resulted in reduced levels of HBc in nuclei 
of transfected cells. In summary, we identified PRMT5 as a potent controller of
HBc cell trafficking and function and described two novel types of HBc
post-translational modifications (PTMs), arginine methylation and ubiquitination.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0186982 
PMCID: PMC5655436
PMID: 29065155  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
