

14. Hepatology. 2018 Apr;67(4):1237-1252. doi: 10.1002/hep.29609. Epub 2018 Feb 22.

Hepatitis B virus sensitivity to interferon-α in hepatocytes is more associated
with cellular interferon response than with viral genotype.

Shen F(1)(2), Li Y(1), Wang Y(1), Sozzi V(3), Revill PA(3), Liu J(1), Gao L(2),
Yang G(2), Lu M(4), Sutter K(4), Dittmer U(4), Chen J(1), Yuan Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Shanghai Medical College of Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Roche Innovation Center Shanghai, Shanghai, China.
(3)Victorian Infectious Diseases Reference Laboratory, The Royal Melbourne
Hospital at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne,
Australia.
(4)Institute of Virology, University Hospital Essen, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.

Interferon-α (IFN-α) is used to treat chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection, 
but only 20%-40% of patients respond well. Clinical observations have suggested
that HBV genotype is associated with the response to IFN therapy; however, its
role in viral responsiveness to IFN in HBV-infected hepatocytes remains unclear. 
Here, we produced infectious virions of HBV genotypes A to D to infect three
well-recognized cell-culture-based HBV infection systems, including primary human
hepatocytes (PHH), differentiated HepaRG (dHepaRG), and HepG2-NTCP cells to
quantitatively compare the antiviral effect of IFN-α on HBV across genotypes and 
cell models. The efficacy of IFN-α against HBV in hepatocytes was generally
similar across genotypes A2, B5, C2, and D3; however, it was significantly
different among the infection models given that the half maximal inhibitory
concentration value of IFN-α for inhibition of viral DNA replication in PHH (<20 
U/mL) and dHepaRG cells were much lower than that in HepG2-NTCP cells (>500
U/mL). Notably, even in PHH, IFN-α did not reduce HBV covalently closed circular 
DNA at the concentrations for which viral antigens and DNA replication
intermediates were strongly reduced. The three cell-culture models exhibited
differential cellular response to IFN-α. The genes reported to be associated with
responsiveness to IFN-α in patients were robustly induced in PHH while weakly
induced in HepG2-NTCP cells upon IFN-α treatment. Reduction or promotion of IFN
response in PHH or HepG2-NTCP cells significantly attenuated or improved the
inhibitory capacity of IFN-α on HBV replication, respectively.CONCLUSION: In the 
cell-culture-based HBV infection models, the sensitivity of HBV to IFN-α in
hepatocytes is determined more by the cell-intrinsic IFN response than by viral
genotype, and improvement of the IFN response in HepG2-NTCP cells promotes the
efficacy of IFN-α against HBV. (Hepatology 2018;67:1237-1252).

© 2017 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.29609 
PMID: 29059468  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
