
Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: Fabien Zoulim has received 
research grants and consultancy honoraria from Hoffmann-La-Roche, Gilead
Sciences, Novira Therapeutics, Janssen, Assembly Biosciences, Arbutus, Contravir,
Sanofi, and Transgene. Levrero Massimo is on the advisory boards of BMS, Assembly
Biosciences, Gilead, Arbutus, Janssen, Galapagos, and Medimmune.


18. Hepatology. 2017 Dec;66(6):2066-2077. doi: 10.1002/hep.29479. Epub 2017 Nov 6.

Epigenetic regulation of hepatitis B virus covalently closed circular DNA:
Implications for epigenetic therapy against chronic hepatitis B.

Hong X(1), Kim ES(2), Guo H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Georgetown University Medical
Center, Washington, DC.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection represents a significant public health burden
worldwide. Although current therapeutics manage to control the disease
progression, lifelong treatment and surveillance are required because drug
resistance develops during treatment and reactivations frequently occur following
medication cessation. Thus, the occurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma is
decreased, but not eliminated. One major reason for failure of HBV treatment is
the inability to eradicate or inactivate the viral covalently closed circular DNA
(cccDNA), which is a stable episomal form of the viral genome decorated with host
histones and nonhistone proteins. Accumulating evidence suggests that epigenetic 
modifications of cccDNA contribute to viral replication and the outcome of
chronic HBV infection. Here, we summarize current progress on HBV epigenetics
research and the therapeutic implications for chronic HBV infection by learning
from the epigenetic therapies for cancer and other viral diseases, which may open
a new venue to cure chronic hepatitis B. (Hepatology 2017;66:2066-2077).

Â© 2017 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.29479 
PMCID: PMC5696023
PMID: 28833361  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
