

20. J Hepatol. 2017 Oct;67(4):847-861. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2017.05.008. Epub 2017 Aug
1.

Hepatitis B cure: From discovery to regulatory approval.

Lok AS(1), Zoulim F(2), Dusheiko G(3), Ghany MG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI, United States. Electronic address: aslok@med.umich.edu.
(2)Cancer Research Center of Lyon-INSERM U1052, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon
University, Lyon, France.
(3)University College London Medical School and Kings College Hospital, London,
UK.
(4)Liver Diseases Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States.

The majority of persons currently treated for chronic hepatitis B require
long-term or lifelong therapy. New inhibitors of hepatitis B virus entry,
replication, assembly, or secretion and immune modulatory therapies are in
development. The introduction of these novel compounds for chronic hepatitis B
necessitates a standardised appraisal of the efficacy and safety of these
treatments and definitions of new or additional endpoints to inform clinical
trials. To move the field forward and to expedite the pathway from discovery to
regulatory approval, a workshop with key stakeholders was held in September 2016 
to develop a consensus on treatment endpoints to guide the design of clinical
trials aimed at hepatitis B cure. The consensus reached was that a complete
sterilising cure, i.e., viral eradication from the host, is unlikely to be
feasible. Instead, a functional cure characterised by sustained loss of hepatitis
B surface antigen with or without hepatitis B surface antibody seroconversion,
which is associated with improved clinical outcomes, in a higher proportion of
patients than is currently achieved with existing treatments is a feasible goal. 
Development of standardised assays for novel biomarkers toward better defining
hepatitis B virus cure should occur in parallel with development of novel
antiviral and immune modulatory therapies such that approval of new treatments
can be linked to the approval of new diagnostic assays used to measure efficacy
or to predict response. Combination of antiviral and immune modulatory therapies 
will likely be needed to achieve functional hepatitis B virus cure. Limited
proof-of-concept monotherapy studies to evaluate safety and antiviral activity
should be conducted prior to proceeding to combination therapies. The safety of
any new curative therapies will be paramount given the excellent safety of
currently approved nucleos(t)ide analogues.

Copyright Â© 2017 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases, European
Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2017.05.008 
PMID: 28778687  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
