
Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interest.


25. Viruses. 2017 Jun 6;9(6). pii: E139. doi: 10.3390/v9060139.

Detection of HBV Covalently Closed Circular DNA.

Li X(1), Zhao J(2), Yuan Q(3), Xia N(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Vaccinology and Molecular Diagnostics,
School of Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361102, China.
15711511022@163.com.
(2)National Institute of Diagnostics and Vaccine Development in Infectious
Diseases, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361102, China.
21620111152491@stu.xmu.edu.cn.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Vaccinology and Molecular Diagnostics,
School of Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361102, China.
yuanquan@xmu.edu.cn.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Vaccinology and Molecular Diagnostics,
School of Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361102, China.
nsxia@xmu.edu.cn.
(5)National Institute of Diagnostics and Vaccine Development in Infectious
Diseases, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361102, China.
nsxia@xmu.edu.cn.

Chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection affects approximately 240 million
people worldwide and remains a serious public health concern because its complete
cure is impossible with current treatments. Covalently closed circular DNA
(cccDNA) in the nucleus of infected cells cannot be eliminated by present
therapeutics and may result in persistence and relapse. Drug development
targeting cccDNA formation and maintenance is hindered by the lack of efficient
cccDNA models and reliable cccDNA detection methods. Southern blotting is
regarded as the gold standard for quantitative cccDNA detection, but it is
complicated and not suitable for high-throughput drug screening, so more
sensitive and simple methods, including polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based
methods, Invader assays, in situ hybridization and surrogates, have been
developed for cccDNA detection. However, most methods are not reliable enough,
and there are no unified standards for these approaches. This review will
summarize available methods for cccDNA detection. It is hoped that more robust
methods for cccDNA monitoring will be developed and that standard operation
procedures for routine cccDNA detection in scientific research and clinical
monitoring will be established.

DOI: 10.3390/v9060139 
PMCID: PMC5490816
PMID: 28587292  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
