

31. J Hepatol. 2017 Aug;67(2):370-398. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2017.03.021. Epub 2017 Apr
18.

EASL 2017 Clinical Practice Guidelines on the management of hepatitis B virus
infection.

European Association for the Study of the Liver. Electronic address:
easloffice@easloffice.eu; European Association for the Study of the Liver.

Collaborators: Lampertico P, Agarwal K, Berg T, Buti M, Janssen HLA,
Papatheodoridis G, Zoulim F, Tacke F.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection remains a global public health problem with
changing epidemiology due to several factors including vaccination policies and
migration. This Clinical Practice Guideline presents updated recommendations for 
the optimal management of HBV infection. Chronic HBV infection can be classified 
into five phases: (I) HBeAg-positive chronic infection, (II) HBeAg-positive
chronic hepatitis, (III) HBeAg-negative chronic infection, (IV) HBeAg-negative
chronic hepatitis and (V) HBsAg-negative phase. All patients with chronic HBV
infection are at increased risk of progression to cirrhosis and hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC), depending on host and viral factors. The main goal of therapy is
to improve survival and quality of life by preventing disease progression, and
consequently HCC development. The induction of long-term suppression of HBV
replication represents the main endpoint of current treatment strategies, while
HBsAg loss is an optimal endpoint. The typical indication for treatment requires 
HBV DNA >2,000IU/ml, elevated ALT and/or at least moderate histological lesions, 
while all cirrhotic patients with detectable HBV DNA should be treated.
Additional indications include the prevention of mother to child transmission in 
pregnant women with high viremia and prevention of HBV reactivation in patients
requiring immunosuppression or chemotherapy. The long-term administration of a
potent nucleos(t)ide analogue with high barrier to resistance, i.e., entecavir,
tenofovir disoproxil or tenofovir alafenamide, represents the treatment of
choice. Pegylated interferon-alfa treatment can also be considered in mild to
moderate chronic hepatitis B patients. Combination therapies are not generally
recommended. All patients should be monitored for risk of disease progression and
HCC. Treated patients should be monitored for therapy response and adherence. HCC
remains the major concern for treated chronic hepatitis B patients. Several
subgroups of patients with HBV infection require specific focus. Future treatment
strategies to achieve 'cure' of disease and new biomarkers are discussed.

Copyright Â© 2017 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2017.03.021 
PMID: 28427875  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
