

36. Virology. 2017 Feb;502:176-187. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2016.12.025. Epub 2017 Jan
3.

Characterization of the disassembly and reassembly of the HBV glycoprotein
surface antigen, a pliable nanoparticle vaccine platform.

Gallagher JR(1), Torian U(1), McCraw DM(1), Harris AK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 50 South Drive, Room 6351,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 50 South Drive, Room 6351,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address: harrisau@mail.nih.gov.

While nanoparticle vaccine technology is gaining interest due to the success of
vaccines like those for the human papillomavirus that is based on viral capsid
nanoparticles, little information is available on the disassembly and reassembly 
of viral surface glycoprotein-based nanoparticles. One such particle is the
hepatitis B virus surface antigen (sAg) that exists as nanoparticles. Here we
show, using biochemical analysis coupled with electron microscopy, that sAg
nanoparticle disassembly requires both reducing agent to disrupt intermolecular
disulfide bonds, and detergent to disrupt hydrophobic interactions that stabilize
the nanoparticle. Particles were otherwise resistant to salt and urea, suggesting
the driving mechanism of particle formation involves hydrophobic interactions. We
reassembled isolated sAg protein into nanoparticles by detergent removal and
reassembly resulted in a wider distribution of particle diameters. Knowledge of
these driving forces of nanoparticle assembly and stability should facilitate
construction of epitope-displaying nanoparticles that can be used as immunogens
in vaccines.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2016.12.025 
PMCID: PMC5276716
PMID: 28061386  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
