

38. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 Sep 16;478(2):825-30. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.08.032. Epub 2016 Aug 5.

Nuclear factor Y regulates ancient budgerigar hepadnavirus core promoter
activity.

Shen Z(1), Liu Y(2), Luo M(1), Wang W(1), Liu J(1), Liu W(1), Pan S(3), Xie Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology (Ministry of Health and Ministry 
of Education), Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan
University, Shanghai 200031, China.
(2)Department of Surgery, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 200040,
China.
(3)Shanghai Keybiomed Technology Co., Ltd., Shanghai 201206, China. Electronic
address: panshaokun@foxmail.com.
(4)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology (Ministry of Health and Ministry 
of Education), Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan
University, Shanghai 200031, China. Electronic address: yhxie@fudan.edu.cn.

Endogenous viral elements (EVE) in animal genomes are the fossil records of
ancient viruses and provide invaluable information on the origin and evolution of
extant viruses. Extant hepadnaviruses include avihepadnaviruses of birds and
orthohepadnaviruses of mammals. The core promoter (Cp) of hepadnaviruses is vital
for viral gene expression and replication. We previously identified in the
budgerigar genome two EVEs that contain the full-length genome of an ancient
budgerigar hepadnavirus (eBHBV1 and eBHBV2). Here, we found eBHBV1 Cp and eBHBV2 
Cp were active in several human and chicken cell lines. A region from nt -85
to -11 in eBHBV1 Cp was critical for the promoter activity. Bioinformatic
analysis revealed a putative binding site of nuclear factor Y (NF-Y), a
ubiquitous transcription factor, at nt -64 to -50 in eBHBV1 Cp. The NF-Y core
binding site (ATTGG, nt -58 to -54) was essential for eBHBV1 Cp activity. The
same results were obtained with eBHBV2 Cp and duck hepatitis B virus Cp. The
subunit A of NF-Y (NF-YA) was recruited via the NF-Y core binding site to eBHBV1 
Cp and upregulated the promoter activity. Finally, the NF-Y core binding site is 
conserved in the Cps of all the extant avihepadnaviruses but not of
orthohepadnaviruses. Interestingly, a putative and functionally important NF-Y
core binding site is located at nt -21 to -17 in the Cp of human hepatitis B
virus. In conclusion, our findings have pinpointed an evolutionary conserved and 
functionally critical NF-Y binding element in the Cps of avihepadnaviruses.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.08.032 
PMID: 27501758  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
