

39. Antiviral Res. 2016 Aug;132:26-37. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2016.05.005. Epub
2016 May 13.

Establishment of an inducible HBV stable cell line that expresses
cccDNA-dependent epitope-tagged HBeAg for screening of cccDNA modulators.

Cai D(1), Wang X(2), Yan R(1), Mao R(1), Liu Y(3), Ji C(4), Cuconati A(5), Guo
H(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biotechnology and Virology Research, Drexel University College
of Medicine, Doylestown, PA, 18902, USA; Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, 46202, USA.
(2)Baruch S. Blumberg Institute, Hepatitis B Foundation, Doylestown, PA, 18902,
USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, 46202, USA.
(4)Virology Discovery and Translational Area, Roche Pharma Research and Early
Development, Nutley, NJ, 07110, USA. Electronic address: changhua.ji2@pfizer.com.
(5)Baruch S. Blumberg Institute, Hepatitis B Foundation, Doylestown, PA, 18902,
USA. Electronic address: acuconati@arbutusbio.com.
(6)Institute for Biotechnology and Virology Research, Drexel University College
of Medicine, Doylestown, PA, 18902, USA; Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, 46202, USA. 
Electronic address: haitguo@iupui.edu.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) covalently closed circular (ccc) DNA is essential to the 
virus life cycle, its elimination during chronic infection is considered critical
to a durable therapy but has not been achieved by current antivirals. Despite
being essential, cccDNA has not been the major target of high throughput
screening (HTS), largely because of the limitations of current HBV tissue culture
systems, including the impracticality of detecting cccDNA itself. In response to 
this need, we have previously developed a proof-of-concept HepDE19 cell line in
which the production of wildtype e antigen (HBeAg) is dependent upon cccDNA.
However, the existing assay system is not ideal for HTS because the HBeAg ELISA
cross reacts with a viral HBeAg homologue, which is the core antigen (HBcAg)
expressed largely in a cccDNA-independent fashion in HepDE19 cells. To further
improve the assay specificity, we report herein a "second-generation" cccDNA
reporter cell line, termed HepBHAe82. In the similar principle of HepDE19 line,
an in-frame HA epitope tag was introduced into the precore domain of HBeAg open
reading frame in the transgene of HepBHAe82 cells without disrupting any
cis-element critical for HBV replication and HBeAg secretion. A chemiluminescence
ELISA assay (CLIA) for the detection of HA-tagged HBeAg with HA antibody serving 
as capture antibody and HBeAb serving as detection antibody has been developed to
eliminate the confounding signal from HBcAg. The miniaturized HepBHAe82 cell
based assay system exhibits high level of cccDNA-dependent HA-HBeAg production
and high specific readout signals with low background. We have also established a
HepHA-HBe4 cell line expressing transgene-dependent HA-HBeAg as a counter screen 
to identify HBeAg inhibitors. The HepBHAe82 system is amenable to antiviral HTS
development, and can be used to identify host factors that regulate cccDNA
metabolism and transcription.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2016.05.005 
PMCID: PMC5060949
PMID: 27185623  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
