

40. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Feb 23;113(8):2074-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1525616113. Epub 2016 Feb 8.

Structural and biochemical analysis of Bcl-2 interaction with the hepatitis B
virus protein HBx.

Jiang T(1), Liu M(1), Wu J(1), Shi Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Protein Science, Tsinghua-Peking Joint
Center for Life Sciences, Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Structural
Biology, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
(2)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Protein Science, Tsinghua-Peking Joint
Center for Life Sciences, Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Structural
Biology, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
shi-lab@tsinghua.edu.cn.

HBx is a hepatitis B virus protein that is required for viral infectivity and
replication. Anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family members are thought to be among the
important host targets of HBx. However, the structure and function of HBx are
poorly understood and the molecular mechanism of HBx-induced carcinogenesis
remains unknown. In this study, we report biochemical and structural
characterization of HBx. The recombinant HBx protein contains metal ions, in
particular iron and zinc. A BH3-like motif in HBx (residues 110-135) binds Bcl-2 
with a dissociation constant of ∼193 μM, which is drastically lower than that for
a canonical BH3 motif from Bim or Bad. Structural analysis reveals that, similar 
to other BH3 motifs, the BH3-like motif of HBx adopts an amphipathic α-helix and 
binds the conserved BH3-binding groove on Bcl-2. Unlike the helical Bim or Bad
BH3 motif, the C-terminal portion of the bound HBx BH3-like motif has an extended
conformation and makes considerably fewer interactions with Bcl-2. These
observations suggest that HBx may modulate Bcl-2 function in a way that is
different from that of the classical BH3-only proteins.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1525616113 
PMCID: PMC4776483
PMID: 26858413  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
