

42. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2016 Jan 4;6(1):a021360. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a021360.

Origins and Evolution of Hepatitis B Virus and Hepatitis D Virus.

Littlejohn M(1), Locarnini S(1), Yuen L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Research and Development, Victorian Infectious Diseases Reference
Laboratory, Doherty Institute, Melbourne 3000, Australia.

Members of the family Hepadnaviridae fall into two subgroups: mammalian and
avian. The detection of endogenous avian hepadnavirus DNA integrated into the
genomes of zebra finches has revealed a deep evolutionary origin of
hepadnaviruses that was not previously recognized, dating back at least 40
million and possibly >80 million years ago. The nonprimate mammalian members of
the Hepadnaviridae include the woodchuck hepatitis virus (WHV), the ground
squirrel hepatitis virus, and arctic squirrel hepatitis virus, as well as a
number of members of the recently described bat hepatitis virus. The
identification of hepatitis B viruses (HBVs) in higher primates, such as
chimpanzee, gorilla, orangutan, and gibbons that cluster with the human HBV, as
well as a number of recombinant forms between humans and primates, further
implies a more complex origin of this virus. We discuss the current theories of
the origin and evolution of HBV and propose a model that includes cross-species
transmissions and subsequent recombination events on a genetic backbone of
genotype C HBV infection. The hepatitis delta virus (HDV) is a defective RNA
virus requiring the presence of the HBV for the completion of its life cycle. The
origins of this virus remain unknown, although some recent studies have suggested
an ancient African radiation. The age of the association between HDV and HBV is
also unknown.

Copyright Â© 2016 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; all rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1101/cshperspect.a021360 
PMCID: PMC4691804
PMID: 26729756  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
