

48. Intervirology. 2014;57(3-4):141-50. doi: 10.1159/000360947. Epub 2014 Jul 15.

Genotypes and genetic variability of hepatitis B virus.

Kramvis A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hepatitis Virus Diversity Research Programme (HVDRP), Department of Internal
Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand,
Johannesburg, South Africa.

Sequence heterogeneity is a feature of hepatitis B virus (HBV), the prototype
member of the family Hepadnaviridae. Based on an intergroup divergence of greater
than 7.5% across the complete genome, HBV has been classified phylogenetically
into 9 genotypes, A-I, with a putative 10th genotype 'J', isolated from a single 
individual. With between approximately 4 and 8% intergroup nucleotide divergence 
across the complete genome and good bootstrap support, genotypes A-D, F, H, and I
are classified further into subgenotypes. There is a broad and highly
statistically significant correlation between serological subtypes and genotypes,
and in some cases, serological subtypes can be used to differentiate
subgenotypes. The genotypes, and certain subgenotypes, have distinct geographical
distributions and are important in both the clinical manifestation of infection
and response to antiviral therapy. HBV genotypes/subgenotypes and genetic
variability of HBV are useful in epidemiological and transmission studies,
tracing human migrations, and in predicting the risk for the development of
severe liver disease and response to antiviral therapy. Moreover, knowledge of
the genotype/subgenotype is important in implementing preventative strategies.
Thus, it is crucial that new strains are correctly assigned to their respective
genotype/subgenotype and consistent, unambiguous, and generally accepted
nomenclature is utilized.

Â© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000360947 
PMID: 25034481  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
